Introducing 

SCIENCE 

Alan Isaacs 



THIS DIRECT AND LIVELY BOOK perf orms a genuine 
service to the reader eager to know what modern 
science is all about. 

Organized around two central concepts matter 
and energy Introducing Science uses no "scien- 
tific" word without first explaining it and requires 
no prior knowledge of mathematics. It makes 
easily comprehensible the most recent advances 
in physics, chemistry, biochemistry, and related 
fields. 

Dr. Isaacs first explains what constitutes inor- 
ganic, organic, and living matter including ele- 
ments, atoms, and molecules; gases, liquids, 
solids, and crystals; and cell reproduction, vi- 
ruses, and DNA. 

He then turns to energy chemical, mechanical, 
electrical, radiant, and nuclear lucidly explain- 
ing such "complexities" as electromagnetic fields, 
radiation, relativity, and thermonuclear reaction. 

In the final section, he surveys the boundaries of 
knowledge, discussing in particular the creation 
of life and of the universe and the ultimate nature 
of matter. 

"Public opinion in matters scientific," writes Isaac 
Asimov in his , "cannot exist in a vac- 
uum The knowledge on which a rational and 

constructive public opinion may form itself can 
come only from the labors of those who . . . possess 
the ability to explain it to those without special- 
ized training and are willing to spend the time to 
do so. 

(continued on back flap) 




MAI JAN 16 1985 



MAR 13 1985 



MAI FE8 7 1991 

MAI FCB 1 7 1S94 



INTRODUCING 

SCIENCE 



INTRODUCING 

SCIENCE 

ALAN ISAACS 

 by Isaac Asimov 



BASIC BOOKS, Inc., Publishers 

NEW YORK 



Copyright Alan Isaacs, 1963 

 copyright 1964 by Basic Books, Inc. 

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 64-13752 

Manufactured in the United States of America 



CONTENTS 

 Isaac Asimov 

INTRODUCTION 

Part One 11 

1 MATTER, ENERGY, AND THE UNIVERSE 13 

Part Two: Matter 19 

2 THE CONSTITUTION OF MATTER 21 

3 THE PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER 40 

4 INORGANIC MATTER 48 

5 ORGANIC MATTER 69 

6 LIVING MATTER 88 

Part Three: Energy 125 

7 THE CONCEPTION OF ENERGY 127 

8 CHEMICAL ENERGY, HEAT, AND 

MECHANICAL ENERGY 131 

9 ELECTRICAL ENERGY 139 

10 RADIANT ENERGY 153 

11 NUCLEAR ENERGY 202 

Part Four: The Boundaries of Knowledge 221 

12 THE CREATION 223 

13 THE NATURE OF MATTER 234 
EPILOGUE 239 
INDEX 241 



 

Isaac Asimov 



ABOUT 1600, modern experimental science broke on the con- 
sciousness of Europe, and the learned world took to it with 
delight. Galileo's books on his discoveries were best sellers. 
When Otto von Guericke demonstrated the force of air pres- 
sure by fitting together metal hemispheres, evacuating them, 
and then setting teams of horses to pull at them in opposite 
directions, the Emperor Ferdinand III himself was in the 
audience. 

In the next century, during the height of the Age of Rea- 
son, those who lectured on the new force of electricity 
gathered large and interested audiences. When Abbe Jean 
Antoine Nollet passed an electric shock through hundreds of 
monks holding hands in a large circle, the cream of the 
French aristocracy watched in interest. Louis XV himself 
was present at one of the demonstrations. 

Nor was it only as audiences that the leisure class figured. 
In the 1660's, the Royal Society was founded in London, and 
its members were largely men of independent means who 
were fascinated with the thought of experimenting for them-^ 
selves. They gathered together that they might describe the 
results of those experiments to others and listen in their turn 
to what those others had done. They were the 'gentlemen 
amateurs' of science. 

What had begun about 1600 came to an end about 1800. 
The reasons for that end were many. First, the French Revo- 
lution had destroyed the leisurely world of the Age of Rea- 
son that century-and-a-half oasis after the fierce Wars of 
Religion were over and before the fierce wars of nationalism 
had begun. Worse still, as wars grew fierce again, all social 
stability seemed gone. Aristocrats had died under the guillo- 
tine, and everywhere the threat of the guillotine's return re- 
mained. It was no time for leisure classes and dilettantism. 



 

Second, the engineering applications of science grew more 
marked and important. The development of a practical steam 
engine by James Watt initiated what is now called the In- 
dustrial Revolution, and advances in science grew to be of 
primary interest to mercantile and manufacturing groups in- 
terested in production and profit rather than in abstract 
knowledge. To the leisured gentlemen who saw in science 
chiefly a new way to pursue the old aims of the ancient 
philosophers, that is, to penetrate the secrets of nature by ex- 
periment rather than by introspection to these, science had 
become middle-class and dirty. The gentlemen amateurs re- 
treated to the humanities. 

Third, and perhaps most important, the very weight of ac- 
cumulated knowledge broke down the polite support of the 
pillars of society. It was no longer possible to understand a 
scientific experiment as one might enjoy a work of art or ap- 
plaud a great drama. To appreciate science, one had first to 
gather a background; and to do that required concentration, 
effort, and time. 

So it came to pass that, in the nineteenth century, "profes- 
sionalism" entered science. Men could no longer be scientists 
out of casual interest but only out of a lifetime of training 
and study. Indeed, it was only in the nineteenth century that 
the words 'science' and 'scientist' gained their modern mean- 
ing. Until then, what we call science was called 'natural 
philosophy'. The psychological connection with the Greek 
past before 1800 and the break with it after 1800 is clear 
in the very change in names. 

The scientists themselves, conscious of lifetimes spent in 
training, no longer concerned themselves, for the most part, 
with the task of expounding their work to the general public 
even to that portion of the general public which was well 
educated in a nonscientific sense. They addressed themselves, 
instead, to their fellow professionals. As time went by, the 
expansion of scientific knowledge was such that science divided 
itself into a hundred specialties, and each scientist addressed 
only his fellow specialists. 

At no time, of course, did the art of science-writing for the 
general public die out altogether. Among the great scientists 



 

who (usually later in life) devoted themselves to translating 
the great advances of science into the common language were 
Michael Faraday and John Tyndall in the nineteenth century 
and Arthur Eddington and James Jeans in the twentieth. 
They succeeded famously in their popular writings and lec- 
tures. 

But the audience for which they worked shrank in a rela- 
tive sense as science grew either increasingly unpopular or in- 
creasingly out of touch with ordinary men. Though the 
wonders of physical science were all about the generations 
between Napoleon and Hitler, the knowledge behind those 
wonders was increasingly buried in higher mathematics and 
strange chemical symbols. 

Even in biology, which, until the current generation, re- 
mained untouched by mathematics, the strange fatality of 
divorce from the public was maintained. The greatest advance 
of the nineteenth century, Darwin's theory of evolution by 
natural selection, roused the terror of those who feared to re- 
lease their literal understanding of the words of the Bible. 
To these, science seemed not only incomprehensible, but evil. 

In the twentieth century, a great scientific victory actually 
hit the front pages of the newspapers and made a physical 
scientist's name a household word for the first time since the 
days of Isaac Newton. The victory was the new theory of 
relativity, and the scientist was Albert Einstein. Yet, even 
then, one mistaken fact penetrated the mind of the general 
public more than anything else about relativity. This was that 
only twelve men in all the world could understand the new 
theory! All others, the popular belief went, were doomed to 
eternal and irretrievable ignorance. 

This widening division between science and the public has 
often been deplored as undesirable. But, after World War II, 
it was no longer merely undesirable; it had become intoler- 
able. We live in an age in which science is the overwhelming 
concern of everyone. This is a situation which is perhaps not 
good in all respects; it is possible to argue, with nostalgia, that 
mankind would be better off if it were not so. However, it 
is so. 

And, like almost everything else for which man is respon- 



 

sible, science is a two-edged sword. Its every good has its evil 
aspects; its every evil has its good aspect. The advances in 
medicine that have lowered the death rate and added years 
to all our lives have also faced us with a population explosion 
that threatens to reduce us to squalor within a generation. 
The pesticides that have lowered the incidence of disease 
and multiplied our food crops also threaten to upset the 
ecological balance of life. On the other hand, the new under- 
standing of nuclear forces which threaten the human race 
with universal destruction promises us the possibility of al- 
most limitless energy for constructive uses. 

In every direction, the choice is ours. The developments of 
science are, in themselves, impersonal, uncaring, withdrawn; 
but we ourselves can choose between life and death, between 
good and evil. It is not with governments only that the choice 
rests, nor with scientists only, but with us. Even in the modern 
world, even with governments we consider nonrepresentative, 
public opinion counts. 

For many years, the two opposed nuclear supernations, the 
United States and the Soviet Union, have debated some sort 
of treaty ban on nuclear test explosions. For years, no agree- 
ment could be reached, and not because no agreement was 
possible. Neither side, it seemed, would come to an agreement 
that was not favorable to itself, and each side dreaded that 
an agreement that seemed favorable might turn out in the 
long run to be unfavorable. Neither side could achieve the 
maximum security it considered necessary. 

Such a stalemate might have lasted indefinitely or until 
rendered meaningless by a nuclear war were it not for the 
weight of public opinion. The vast majority of the human race 
fears the effects of fallout on them and their posterity. Its 
increasingly desperate anxiety made itself felt. If either 
government had wilfully refused a test ban that was not 
clearly impossible of acceptance on some rational basis, it 
would have paid the price of a vast guilt in the minds of 
men everywhere. Neither government was willing to pay that 
price, and the test ban was eventually signed. 

But public opinion in matters scientific cannot exist in a 



 

vacuum. It can be swayed by the deliberate appeals of men 
who wish to manipulate this powerful force to their own 
benefit, or it can form itself, rationally, on the basis of 
objective knowledge. Clearly, it is the latter alternative which 
is desirable. 

The knowledge on which a rational and constructive public 
opinion may form itself can come only from the labors of 
those who, understanding science themselves, possess the abil- 
ity to explain it to those without specialized training and are 
willing to spend the time to do so. 

Dr. Isaacs is one of these scientist-writers. Within a small 
compass, without the use of mathematics, with minimum use 
of symbols, he manages to cover the salient areas of chemis- 
try and physics. 

Science is no mystery, and Dr. Isaacs makes it none. It is, 
instead, a great adventure which all of us ought to understand 
if not as professional participants, then at least as intelli- 
gent and interested onlookers. Dr. Isaacs helps us do that. 

If it is the great responsibility of men like Dr. Isaacs to 
help us, it is equally the great responsibility of the rest of 
us to allow ourselves to be helped. 



INTRODUCTION 



IN our modern civilization science plays an ever-increasing part, 
so that to take a full and intelligent share in it each member 
should have at least a rudimentary knowledge of the principles 
involved. Unfortunately, however, the growth of scientific activity 
during this century has not been matched by a sufficiently wide- 
spread growth of scientific education. 

Until recently the only balanced education in scientific subjects 
offered by our schools and universities has been the detailed 
courses for professional scientists. At school the non-scientific 
student has been treated to a very weak dose of c General Science', 
or a uselessly detailed and obsolete course in classical chemistry 
and physics. At the universities non-scientific students have only 
recently been given a course in the fundamentals of contemporary 
science. This state of affairs recently led the Duke of Edinburgh 
to express the view that 'it is doubtful if the kind of science in- 
cluded in the general education of humanists is even barely 
adequate'. 

This book, then, is an attempt to present a picture of the funda- 
mental principles of science to both the adult general reader, who 
has not had the benefit of an adequate course in science during 
his formal education, and also to the school or university student 
whose principal interests are non-scientific. 

The subject of science has been expanding in all directions at 
such a rate during the last fifty years that in order to produce a 
reasonably slender volume - not too superficial to be valueless - it 
has been necessary to state the present view of the facts, with only 
a minimal reference to the historical sequence of their discovery 
or discoverers. This depersonalization has its disadvantages, but 
it is hoped that the advantages of a purely logical approach will 
be of overall benefit to the reader. 

From the beginning of this book no 'scientific' word is used 
without being first explained, although formal definitions have 



10 Introduction 

been avoided if they would break the logical sequence of the ex- 
position. Furthermore, this book has been constructed on the 
assumption that the reader has no previous knowledge of the 
subject and, as the approach throughout is purely descriptive, 
there are no mathematical requirements. 



PART ONE 



CHAPTER 1 

MATTER, ENERGY, AND THE UNIVERSE 



WE are made aware of the universe in which we live by the action 
of either matter or energy on one or more of our senses. For 
example, our senses of taste and smell respond to direct contact 
with matter, whereas our senses of sight and hearing depend on 
radiant energy in the form of light and sound; our sense of touch 
can respond either directly to matter, or, alternatively, to energy 
in the form of radiant heat. By analysing these sense reactions, 
and by using our unique gift of deduction, we, Homo sapiens, 
have been able to construct a body of knowledge concerning the 
way in which the universe works : this knowledge is called Science. 

Science, however, has never been, and probably never will be, a 
static collection of absolute knowledge; it has gradually developed 
during the recorded history of mankind, always progressing to- 
wards a deeper level of understanding and a closer approximation 
to the truth. For example, some 300 years ago Newton was able 
to explain the force of gravity in terms of the attraction which 
exists between any two bodies of matter; he was unable, however, 
to explain the causes of the forces. Fifty years ago Einstein pro- 
vided a more profound explanation of gravity in his General 
Theory of Relativity - but a still more perfect and comprehensive 
theory will continue to be sought by scientists of the future. The 
contents of this book, then, must not be regarded as the last word 
in human knowledge; it does not aspire to be more than a brief 
descriptive survey of the state of this knowledge as it stands at 
the present time. 

Perhaps the most fundamental advance that science has made 
during this century has been the elucidation of the relationship 
which exists between matter and energy. As we shall see later, the 
distinction drawn by our senses between these two concepts is 
much more artificial than it at first appears. The present view is 
that there is no absolute difference between matter and energy - 
that matter results when energy exists in a specialized form. 



14 Introducing Science 

Furthermore, contrary to the old view, matter and energy are 
interconvertible. Thus, when an atom bomb explodes, part of the 
matter which it contains reverts to energy; conversely when the 
energy of a body is increased (for example by raising its velocity) 
its mass, that is the amount of matter which it contains, is also 
increased. However, we shall need to examine this relationship 
in greater detail later in this book. For the moment it will suffice 
to remember that matter and energy can no longer be regarded 
as entirely separate entities - they are interconvertible. 

Nevertheless, the sensory distinction between matter and 
energy still remains a convenient basis for the study of the uni- 
verse, and accordingly this book is divided into two sections, one 
dealing with matter (broadly the study of chemistry) and the 
other dealing with energy (broadly the study of physics). Before 
making a more detailed examination of matter and energy, how- 
ever, it will first be necessary to say a few words about the 
structure of the universe with reference to the position which we 
occupy within it. 

THE EARTH AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 

As far as we are able to tell, the phenomenon of life - at least as 
we know it - is limited to our own earth. The presence of life 
elsewhere in the universe is a possibility, but it is extremely im- 
probable on our neighbouring planets. 

The home of man in the universe then, is the earth, a sphere of 
matter some 8,000 miles in diameter; it is one of nine planets all 
of which revolve in almost circular orbits about a much more 
massive body - the sun. This collection of sun and nine planets 
is known as the 6 solar system', and Figure 1 shows the names of 
the planets, their diameters, and the mean distances of their 
orbits from the sun. The diagram is not to scale and therefore 
gives no idea of the size of the solar system. In fact, to draw such 
a diagram to scale on a page of reasonable dimensions would not 
be possible, as the distances separating the sun and the individual 
planets is very large indeed compared to their diameters. For 
example, although the earth is 8,000 miles in diameter it is about 
93 million miles from the sun, which itself is about 865,000 miles 



Matter \ Energy, and the Universe 



15 



SUN 



Distance from sun 
in millions of miles 
(not to scale) 

Planet diameter in miles 
given in brackets after 
planet's name 



Jupiter (82,800) 




Saturn!(67,200) / 



Uranus (30,900) 



^1111 Neptune (33,000)' 



Q Pluto (3,600) " 



Fig. 1 



16 Introducing Science 

in diameter. These figures give some idea of the vastness of the 
solar system, and at the same time show the extent to which it 
consists of empty space. 

Some of the planets have satellite moons revolving round them, 
just as they in turn revolve round the sun. The earth's moon is a 
spherical body some 2,000 miles in diameter which revolves round 
the earth once every month at a distance of about 250,000 miles 
from the earth. These moons, however, have been omitted from 
the diagram for the sake of simplicity, as have also the asteroids - 
a ring of small pieces of matter which circulate round the sun 
between the planets Mars and Jupiter. 

The nine planets all travel round the sun at different speeds, 
the earth taking 365 days to complete its orbit; this means that 
it is travelling through space at nearly 70,000 miles per hour 
relative to the sun. At the same time the earth is rotating on its 
axis once in every twenty-four hours, thus creating night and day. 

Apart from the question of size, there is a most important 
difference between the sun and the planets. The sun is a hot body 
which radiates the heat and light necessary to sustain life on earth 
whereas the planets are cool bodies which absorb heat from the 
sun and are only made visible to us on earth by light which they 
reflect from the sun. (We shall discuss the source of the sun's 
energy in Chapter 12.) 

The sun is not unique, being only one of a great number of 
similar stars; in order to have some idea of the immensity of the 
universe it must be realized that there are something like 200 
million, million, million stars in that part of the universe which 
is visible through our most powerful telescopes. Each of these 
stars, like our own sun, is a source of energy radiating heat and 
light, and they vary in size from bodies smaller than the earth to 
bodies larger than the whole solar system. It is not possible to 
say how many of these stars have planetary systems similar to our 
own, as they are so far away from us that we are only able to see 
those bodies which radiate their own light. However, it is con- 
sidered likely that at least some of these distant stars are the centre 
of planetary systems, and it is possible that conditions on some 
of these planets are suitable for sustaining life, but this is, of 
course, a matter for speculation. 



Matter, Energy, and the Universe 17 

THE GALAXIES 

The stars are not uniformly distributed throughout the space of 
the universe, they are grouped together in gigantic clusters which 
are called galaxies. Our own galaxy is a flat disc of stars known 
as the Milky Way, and it probably contains about 30,000 million 
stars, of which our own sun is but one small and insignificant 
member. The nearest star to our sun, within the Milky Way, is 
about 25 million, million miles away (it is called Proxima 
Centauri), and the nearest galaxy to our own is about 400,000 
times farther away than this. 

The purpose of setting out these few facts is to see man in his 
true place in the universe. Far from being a central character in 
the cosmic plot, he occupies, as we have seen, but one tiny planet 
which revolves round one of millions of suns in one of millions 
of galaxies. It is hoped that, with this position clearly in mind, the 
reader will proceed to a more detailed examination of the matter 
of which the universe is constructed with an appropriate sense of 
humility. 



PART TWO 

MATTER 



CHAPTER 2 

THE CONSTITUTION OF MATTER 



HAVING briefly discussed the distribution of matter throughout 
the universe, we are now able to proceed to a closer examination 
of its constitution. 

Superficially, any quantity of matter, the paper of this page for 
example, appears to be of a continuous nature - that is, it appears 
to be all of one piece. An ordinary microscope, however, will 
disclose that paper consists of separate fibres of wood pulp 
closely pressed together; an even more exact examination would 
resolve these fibres into groups of separate particles called atoms. 
Finally, as we shall see later, the atoms themselves consist mostly 
of empty space, only a tiny part of which is occupied by minute 
'particles' of concentrated energy. Thus, according to the so- 
called Atomic Theory, matter is not continuous - the smallest 
possible quantity of matter has a definite minimum size (the 
atom), and for this reason we must describe matter as being 
discontinuous. 

By way of comparison, it should be noted that some quantities 
in nature are continuous, for instance time. Between any two 
instants of time, however close they are together, there is no 
instant of timelessness; in fact, there is no minimum size to an 
instant of time. We shall refer again to this comparison when we 
show that energy, too, is a discontinuous quantity. These con- 
siderations, however, belong to the next part of this book; during 
the course of this part we shall pursue an analysis of the constitu- 
tion of matter and its physical states, which we shall follow with 
a brief examination of the main branches of chemistry under 
which matter is studied, namely: 

INORGANIC CHEMISTRY - the study of inanimate matter. 
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY - the study of matter from which living 

things are, or have been, made. 
BIOCHEMISTRY - the study of living matter. 



22 Introducing Science 

THE ELEMENTS 

Just as all the words in our language are constructed from com- 
binations of the twenty-six letters of the alphabet, so all the matter 
in the universe is made from combinations of the ninety-two 
'building bricks' which are called the elements. 

A list of these ninety-two elements is given in Table 1 together 
with the abbreviated symbols internationally agreed to represent 
them; we shall refer to the other information in this table shortly. 
These elements are by no means evenly distributed throughout 
the universe; by far the most common element in the universe is 
the simplest, hydrogen, but on the surface of the earth oxygen is 
easily the most abundant, as will be seen from the following 
figures, which give the approximate percentage composition of the 
earth's outer crust, including the seas and the atmosphere: 

Oxygen 49 Calcium 3 

Silicon 26 Sodium 3 

Aluminium 8 Potassium 2 

Iron 5 Magnesium 2 

These eight elements together constitute some 98 per cent of the 
earth's crust; it is therefore somewhat surprising to note that the 
remaining eighty-four elements only constitute about 2 per cent, 
and such an apparently common element as copper is only present 
on the surface of the earth to an extent of about 0-01 per cent. 
The constitution of the core of the earth is not known for certain, 
but it is believed to consist principally of iron (possibly molten) 
enclosed in a mantle of dense rock, which is overlain by a thin 
outer crust. 

The smallest particle of an element which can exist and main- 
tain its identity is called an atom; there are therefore ninety-two 
fundamentally different types of atom. Although we shall show 
that atoms themselves have a definite structure and are capable 
of transmutation under certain circumstances, for all 'chemical* 
purposes the atoms of the elements are the smallest indivisible 
units of matter. 

COMPOUNDS 

While there are only ninety-two elements, there are several 
millions of chemically distinguishable substances, all of which are 



The Constitution of Matter 

Table 1 
THE ELEMENTS 



23 



Atomic 
num- Element 
her 


Symbol 


Atomic 
weight 


Atomic 
num- Element 
her 


Symbol Ato c 
* weight 


1 


Hydrogen 


H 


1-008 


40 


Zirconium 


Zr 


91-22 


2 


Helium 


He 


4*003 


41 


Niobium 


Nb 


92-91 


3 


Lithium 


Li 


6-940 


42 


Molybdenum 


Mo 


95-95 


4 


Beryllium 


Be 


9-013 


43 


Technetium 


Tc 


99 


5 


Boron 


B 


10-82 


44 


Ruthenium 


Ru 


101-1 


6 


Carbon 


C 


12-01 


45 


Rhodium 


Rh 


102-9 


7 


Nitrogen 


N 


14-01 


46 


Palladium 


Pd 


106-7 


8 


Oxygen 


O 


16-00 


47 


Silver 


Ag 


107-9 


9 


Fluorine 


F 


19-00 


48 


Cadmium 


Cd 


112-4 


10 


Neon 


Ne 


20-19 


49 


Indium 


In 


114-8 


11 


Sodium 


Na 


22-99 


50 


Tin 


Sn 


118-7 


12 


Magnesium 


Mg 


24-32 


51 


Antimony 


Sb 


121-8 


13 


Aluminium 


Al 


26-98 


52 


Tellurium 


Te 


127-6 


14 


Silicon 


Si 


28-09 


53 


Iodine 


I 


126-9 


15 


Phosphorus 


P 


30-97 


54 


Xenon 


Xe 


131-3 


16 


Sulphur 


S 


32-07 


55 


Caesium 


Cs 


132-9 


17 


Chlorine 


Cl 


35-46 


56 


Barium 


Ba 


137-4 


18 


Argon 


A 


39-94 


57 


Lanthanum 


La 


138-9 


19 


Potassium 


K 


39-10 


58 


Cerium 


Ce 


140-1 


20 


Calcium 


Ca 


40-08 


59 


Praseodymium 


Pr 


140-9 


21 


Scandium 


Sc 


44-96 


60 


Neodymium 


Nd 


144-3 


22 


Titanium 


Ti 


47-90 


61 


Promethium 


Pm 


145 


23 


Vanadium 


V 


50-95 


62 


Samarium 


Sm 


150-4 


24 


Chromium 


Cr 


52-01 


63 


Europium 


Eu 


152 


25 


Manganese 


Mn 


54-94 


64 


Gadolinium 


Gd 


156-9 


26 


Iron 


Fe 


55-85 


65 


Terbium 


Tb 


158-9 


27 


Cobalt 


Co 


58-94 


66 


Dysprosium 


Dy 


162-5 


28 


Nickel 


Ni 


58-69 


67 


Holmium 


Ho 


164-9 


29 


Copper 


Cu 


63-54 


68 


Erbium 


Er 


167-2 


30 


Zinc 


Zn 


65-38 


69 


Thulium 


Tm 


168-9 


31 


Gallium 


Ga 


69-72 


70 


Ytterbium 


Yb 


173-0 


32 


Germanium 


Ge 


72-60 


71 


Lutetium 


Lu 


175 


33 


Arsenic 


As 


74-91 


72 


Hafnium 


Hf 


178-6 


34 


Selenium 


Se 


78-96 


73 


Tantalum 


Ta 


180-9 


35 


Bromine 


Br 


79-92 


74 


Wolfram 


W 


183-9 


36 


Krypton 


Kr 


83-80 


75 


Rhenium 


Re 


186-3 


37 


Rubidium 


Rb 


85-48 


76 


Osmium 


Os 


190-2 


38 


Strontium 


Sr 


87-63 


77 


Iridium 


Ir 


192-2 


39 


Yttrium 


Y 


88-92 


78 


Platinum 


Pt 


195-2 



24 



Introducing Science 
Table 1 - contd 



Atomic 






Atomic A. . 


num- Element 
her 


Symbo 


1 Height 


num- Element Symbol ^j j 


79 Gold 


Au 


197-2 


86 Radon Rn 222 


80 Mercury 


Hg 


200-6 


87 Francium Fr 223 


81 Thallium- 


Tl 


204-4 


88 Radium Ra 226 


82 Lead 


Pb 


207-2 


89 Actinium Ac 227 


83 Bismuth 


Bi 


209-0 


90 Thorium Th 232 


84 Polonium 


Po 


210 


91 Protoactinium Pa 231 


85 Astatine 


At 


211 


92 Uranium U 238 



formed by the combination of two or more of the elemeuts - such 
combinations are called compounds. For example, the compound 
water is formed by the combination of two atoms of hydrogen 
with one atom of oxygen. Using the symbols given in Table 1, 
the formula for this compound is written H 2 O. 

In a compound, the atoms of the elements are always present 
in the same proportions; thus, whatever the source of water, it 
will always contain two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of 
oxygen - no variation in this construction is possible. 

The smallest quantity of a compound that can exist and main- 
tain its identity is called a molecule. In the above example, one 
molecule of the compound water is formed from two atoms of the 
element hydrogen and one atom of the element oxygen. This 
sentence should make clear the use of the words atom, molecule, 
element, and compound. These words are most important in the 
study of matter, and the distinction between them must be clearly 
understood. 

There is one further point to be made in this connexion. Under 
normal conditions, certain of the elements are gases, and these 
particular elements rarely exist in nature as single atoms. Usually, 
such elements exist as pairs of atoms combined together like 
compounds, and in this combined form they are also called 
molecules, even though the constituent atoms are of the same 
element. 

In fact, the two elements mentioned above, hydrogen and 
oxygen, are both gases at normal temperatures and pressures, and 
they both exist as molecules each containing two atoms of their 



The Constitution of Matter 25 

respective elements. Such molecules are called diatomic molecules^ 
and they are symbolized H 2 and O 2 . 



MIXTURES 

It is now necessary to distinguish between mixtures of atoms or 
molecules and compounds of atoms. 

In nature, mixtures are very common; for example the air 
which we breathe is a mixture, principally of diatomic molecules 
of oxygen and nitrogen. Although this mixture contains very 
much the same percentage of each gas all over the Earth's surface 
(about 23 per cent oxygen and 76 per cent nitrogen by weight), the 
two components can be separated by such physical means as 
freezing (see page 46), without any chemical changes occurring 
to the molecules themselves. 



CHEMICAL REACTIONS 

For a compound to be formed, a chemical reaction must take 
place between the atoms or molecules concerned, and the 
resulting compound cannot thereafter be altered except by further 
chemical reactions with other atoms or molecules. For example, 
water is not a mixture of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of 
oxygen, but is a compound which results from a chemical reaction 
between these atoms. 

Using the symbols given in Table 1, it is convenient to depict 
the formation of a compound, or in fact any chemical reaction, 
by a chemical equation. As an example, the formation of water is 
written thus: 

2H 2 + O 2 = 2H 2 

Such equations represent the number of atoms taking part in the 
reaction, and, as no atoms can disappear, the number of atoms 
of each element on the left-hand side of the equation must be 
equal to the number on the right-hand side. It is therefore 
necessary to make the equation * balance', which has been done 
in this case by taking two molecules of hydrogen and one mole- 
cule of oxygen to form two molecules of water. 



26 Introducing Science 

To understand the manner in which chemical reactions occur, 
it will now be necessary to examine the structure of the atoms 
themselves. 

ATOMIC STRUCTURE 

We have said that atoms are the smallest particles of matter which 
can take part in chemical reactions, and we have also mentioned 
that they have a definite structure. In fact, the general layout of 
an atom may be visualized as a miniature solar system consisting 
of a central nucleus around which revolve smaller planetary bodies 
called electrons. 

The nucleus is very small indeed compared to the whole atom; 
so small that if the nucleus was the size of a golf ball, the atom 
itself would measure several hundred yards across. In fact, the 
atoms of the elements are extremely small, too small to be seen 
even by the most powerful microscopes, as they measure only 
about a hundred millionth of a centimetre across. As the nucleus 
is even immeasurably smaller than this, it will be readily appreci- 
ated that the atom consists very largely of empty space. 

Electrons 

Before investigating the nucleus of the atom, we must say some- 
thing about electrons, which are the most elementary stable 
particles in the universe. 

An electron is a particle of concentrated energy which has a 
tiny mass (1,000 million, million, million, million electrons weigh 
about 1 gram) and a negative electric charge. Here we are on the 
border-line between mass and energy, for it is probably the 
energy of the electric charge that gives the electron its mass. We 
are also at the limit of our knowledge, because we are unable to 
explain an electric charge - it is a fundamental unit of conception. 
We are, however, able to describe in great detail the behaviour of 
matter which is electrically charged, and it is a common experi- 
ence that such charges exist in two opposite forms, which for 
convenience we call negative and positive. Furthermore, it is a 
common experience that opposite charges attract each other 
whereas similar charges repel each other. 

We must be content, then, to accept the fact that when we 



The Constitution of Matter 27 

describe a particle of matter as being electrically charged, it is in 
such a condition that it has the property, amongst others, of 
attracting oppositely charged particles and repelling similarly 
charged particles in a well-defined manner. It must be added at 
this point that, although we have described the electron as a 
particle of small mass and negative charge, we must make this 
description with reservation. This is because, as we shall learn 
later, electrons are able to behave as if they were waves of energy 
under certain conditions. A theory has been worked out to 
account for this dual particle-wave nature which will be referred 
to again at greater length in Chapter 10. 

For the present, in order to form a working picture of an 
electron, and in order to be able to visualize the part it plays in 
the structure of matter, we shall continue to regard it as a tiny 
negatively charged particle. 

Protons 

Having given a brief outline of the electron, we are now able to 
examine the simplest of all atoms - the hydrogen atom. 

This atom consists of a nucleus with only one planetary 
electron, and the nucleus itself consists of one solitary atomic 
particle called a proton (see Figure 2). Like an electron, a proton 

,'"0% O electron 

\_/ proton 

Fig. 2 

is also a particle of concentrated energy, but a proton is about 
1,850 times heavier than an electron; its electrical charge, though 
equal in magnitude to that of the electron, is opposite in sense - 
that is, the proton is positively charged. Therefore the hydrogen 
atom itself has no resultant charge, as the positive charge of the 
nucleus (one proton) is exactly counterbalanced by the negative 
charge of the electron which circles round it. Furthermore, as 
the proton is so much heavier than the electron, it is obvious 
that nearly all the mass of the atom is concentrated in the nucleus ; 



28 Introducing Science 

this is true for all atoms, not only the hydrogen atom, as we shall 
see from the following paragraphs. 

Neutrons 

There is a further nuclear particle of great importance, which has 
a mass very nearly equal to that of the proton, but no electrical 
charge. In view of its absence of electrical charge this particle is 
called a neutron, and it is present in the nucleus of at least one 
form of all the atoms of the ninety-two elements. (The relation 
between protons and neutrons is further discussed in Chapter 11, 
and recent work concerning their structure is mentioned in 
Chapter 13.) 

Isotopes 

We have so far described only one form of the hydrogen atom, 
that in which the nucleus consists of one proton. There is, how- 
ever, a second form which occurs in nature, although this second 
orm is very much less abundant than the first. 

The second form of hydrogen is called deuterium (or heavy 
hydrogen) and in its atoms the nucleus contains a neutron in 
addition to a proton (Figure 3). All the elements consist of 

/O\ /""\ O electron 

/ A \ / ^K \ 

\ * /' \ /' proton 

x^^x v .s r 

hydrogen deuterium neutron 

Fig. 3 

mixtures of atoms with varying numbers of neutrons in their 
nuclei, and these different types of atom of the same element are 
called isotopes. 

It will be seen that in the two isotopes of hydrogen, the positive 
charge on the nucleus is equal to that of one proton, and there- 
fore only one orbital electron is required to make the atom 
electrically neutral In general, the nuclear charges of all the iso- 
topes of an element are equal, as they always contain the same 
number of protons, although the mass of the nucleus will differ 
from one isotope to another due to the presence of different 
numbers of neutrons. 



The Constitution of Matter 29 

Atomic Number 

As all atoms are electrically neutral, the nuclear charge must be 
counterbalanced by an equal number of planetary electrons. Thus 
the number of protons in the nucleus is equal to the number of 
planetary electrons associated with the atom; this number, which 
is called the atomic number, is a most important aspect of atomic 
structure, for it is upon this factor that the chemical properties of 
an atom depend. The hydrogen atom has one planetary electron, 
and therefore its atomic number is 1 ; the heaviest of the elements, 
uranium, has ninety-two planetary electron^ (and ninety-two 
protons in its nucleus) and therefore its atomic number is 92. 

The elements are arranged in Table 1 (p. 23) in order of 
ascending atomic number; that is to say each element contains 
one more planetary electron (and therefore one more proton in 
its nucleus) than the one before it. The significance of atomic 
numbers in connexion with chemical properties will become 
evident from what we shall say in the following paragraphs. 

Atomic Weight 

As we have seen, the number of neutrons in the nucleus does not 
alter the way in which an atom behaves chemically, because it does 
not alter its electrical charge, but the presence of neutrons makes 
the nucleus, and therefore the atom, heavier. 

As the weight of an atom depends almost entirely upon the 
number of neutrons and protons which it contains, it is clearly 
of convenience to create a scale of atomic weights based on the 
mass of the proton (or the neutron). Such a scale has in fact been 
adopted, but it is slightly complicated by the loss of mass which 
protons and neutrons suffer when they combine. This small loss 
of mass results in the evolution of energy and is responsible for 
the hydrogen bomb and the energy of the sun, as we shall explain 
in Chapter 11. In order to overcome this difficulty the atomic- 
weight scale is based on oxygen, the atoms of which contain 
eight protons and eight neutrons giving an atomic weight of 
exactly 16 (for the most common isotope). On this basis an un- 
combined proton has a weight of 1-008 atomic-weight units, and 
this figure is therefore the atomic weight of hydrogen. 



30 Introducing Science 

A second complication to this scale occurs as a result of the 
existence of isotopes, which can be illustrated by the element 
chlorine, the atomic weight of which, on the scale which we have 
described, is 35457. This value arises because chlorine contains 
754 per cent of one isotope of mass 35 (seventeen protons and 
eighteen neutrons - usually written Cl^) and 24-6 per cent of a 
second isotope of mass 37 (seventeen protons and twenty 
neutrons - Clf ?). In general, in order to obtain the correct value 
for the atomic weight of an element it is necessary to take an 
average of the atomic weights of all its isotopes in proportion to 
the abundance with which they occur in nature. Table 1 (p. 23) 
gives the atomic weights of all the elements taking these com- 
plicating factors into account. It will be noticed from this table 
that in a few instances atomic weights do not increase with atomic 
numbers. This situation arises when the most abundant isotope 
of an element contains one more proton than the most abundant 
isotope of the previous element but fewer neutrons. For example, 
argon (atomic number 18) has three isotopes of mass 40, 36, and 
38 (i.e., 18 protons with 22, 18, and 20 neutrons respectively); 
taking into account the relative abundance of the isotopes the 
atomic weight comes to 39-94. The next element, potassium 
(atomic number 19) has isotopes of mass 39, 41, and 40 (i.e. 19 
protons with 20, 22, and 21 neutrons respectively). As the 
isotope of mass 39 is by far the most abundant, the atomic weight 
of potassium is 39-10 which is less than that of argon. 

Electron Shells 

In defining atomic number, it was stated that as one progresses 
through the elements in order of increasing atomic number, the 
atoms of each successive element possess one more planetary 
electron than its predecessor. 

These planetary electrons do not cluster around the nucleus in 
a disorganized manner; they arrange themselves in rings, each 
ring being capable of containing a fixed number of electrons. 
These rings are called electron shells, and each successive shell 
lies at an increased distance from the nucleus. The first shell will 
hold only a maximum of two electrons, but the next two shells 
will hold up to eight electrons each. Figure 4 gives a pictorial 



The Constitution of M alter 31 

view of the first eighteen elements showing how these electron 
shells are built up. This diagram is not of course to scale, and as 
we shall explain later such a graphical representation must be 
regarded as a simplification of the facts (see page 174). 

In the elements with atomic numbers over 20 the situation 
becomes more complicated because the third, fourth, fifth, and 
sixth electron shells are able to contain more than eight electrons, 
provided that they are not the outer shell. In these elements the 
outer shells are able to accept electrons before the inner ones are 
completed, but in no case can the outer shell contain more than 
eight electrons. As we shall shortly see, it is the number of 
electrons in the outer shell of an atom that governs its chemical 
properties. 

THE PERIODIC TABLE OF THE ELEMENTS 

In Figure 4 on pages 32-3 it will be seen that the eighteen elements 
considered have been arranged in vertical columns so that the 
outer shells of the elements in any particular vertical column 
contain the same number of electrons (except for hydrogen and 
helium in which the only electron shell is limited to five electrons). 
In Table 3 (p. 54) all the elements are arranged in a similar 
manner, although after the first eighteen elements the table 
becomes more complicated and most of the vertical groups as 
they are called, have to be divided into two sub-groups designated 
A and B ; furthermore, an extra group has to be added. We shall go 
into these complications in Chapter 4 in greater detail; here we 
need only note that they result from the effect already mentioned, 
whereby the third to sixth electron shells are able to contain 
more than eight electrons, as long as they are not outer shells. 

This arrangement of the elements is called the periodic table, 
as a recurrence of chemical properties is exhibited at regular or 
periodic intervals, corresponding to the number of electrons in 
the outer shells of the elements. 

The atoms of the group containing the elements helium, neon, 
argon, etc., all have completed outer electron shells of eight 
electrons (except helium which has only one shell which is com- 
pleted with two electrons). These elements are called the inert 
gases because they do not form compounds of any sort, and are 



32 



Introducing Science 







lithium 



beryllium 



boron 



carbon 







sodium 



magnesium aluminium 

Fig. 4 



silicon 



unable to enter into combination with any other atoms - they are 
clearly, therefore, exceptionally stable. 



CHEMICAL COMBINATION 

The stability of the inert gases has been found to result from the 
arrangement of the electrons in their atoms, and we may say that, 
in general, atoms with outer shells containing eight electrons (or 
two in the case of the fibrst shell) are extremely stable: this fact is 
the basis of chemical combination, because it is in order to 
increase their stability in this way that elements form compounds. 

Thus, all the atoms of elements which have incomplete outer 
shells strive to combine with other atoms in such a way that they 
all finish up with outer shells containing their full complement of 
electrons. The inert gases already have completed outer shells, 
and it is for this reason that they do not form compounds. 

The atoms of all the other groups in the periodic table (Table 3, 
p, 54) form compounds by completing their outer shells in one 
of two ways to be described in the following paragraphs. 



The Constitution of Matter 33 

/*N /*\ 

(1) 

hydrogen helium 







nitrogen oxygen fluorine neon 




phosphorus sulphur chlorine argon 

Electrovalent Method of Combination 

The first way in which atoms with incomplete outer shells form 
compounds, is for one of the combining atoms to give to the 
other atom (or atoms) its odd electrons, so that both atoms end 
up with completed outer shells. This is called the electrovalent 
method of combination and it can be illustrated by the formation 
of common salt, which is a compound of the elements sodium 
(Na) and chlorine (Cl) called sodium chloride (NaCl). 




Fig. 5 

Reference to Figure 5 will show that the sodium atom has one 
electron in its outer shell and that the chlorine atom has seven 
electrons in its outer shell. When these two atoms come into 
contact the odd electron from the sodium atom migrates to the 
outer shell of the chlorine atom, thereby achieving the desired 

2 



34 Introducing Science 

result of leaving both atoms with outer shells of eight electrons. 
However, as a result of losing one electron the sodium atom 
becomes positively charged, as it does not have sufficient electrons 
to balance the positive charge of eleven protons in its nucleus. 
Similarly the chlorine atom becomes negatively charged as a 
result of having one more electron than is necessary to neutralize 
its nuclear charge of seventeen protons. As the atoms are 
oppositely charged, they attract each other and consequently 
arrange themselves into the rigid crystals of salt with which we 
are familiar. (Crystal structure will be explained on page 43.) 

When electrovalent combination takes place, and the atoms of 
the combining elements become positively or negatively charged 
as a result, these charged atoms are called ions. Thus, strictly 
speaking, electrovalent crystals consist of collections of ions and 
not collections of atoms. 

If such crystals are dissolved in water, the bond between the 
ions is very greatly weakened and they are able to separate. 
These ions are then able to conduct electricity through the water, 
by the process known as ionic conduction. This accounts for the 
familiar fact that water can be made a good conductor of ele- 
tricity by the addition of common salt, or any other electrovalent 
compound. 

Covalent Method of Combination 

The second way in which compounds are formed is called the 
covalent method of combination, and this method can be illustrated 
by the formation of water from atoms of hydrogen and oxygen, 
as in Figure 6. In this example the six outer electrons of the 
oxygen atom are shared with the single electrons from each of 




The Constitution of Matter 35 

the two hydrogen atoms, thus completing the set of eight electrons 
in the outer shell of the oxygen atom. The electrons from the 
hydrogen atoms in this case, however, are not released from their 
orbits, but are shared between the oxygen and hydrogen atoms, 
so that the hydrogen atoms also have complete outer shells of 
two electrons each. 

In all covalent combinations pairs of electrons are shared in 
this way. For example, the diatomic molecules of both the gases 
oxygen and hydrogen are formed as a result of this type of 
combination (Figure 7). 





Fig. 7 



Valency 



All the compounds that are found in the universe are formed by 
one of the two methods described, or by a combination of both 
methods in certain cases which it is not necessary to discuss for 
present purposes. 

Clearly, however, not all atoms are capable of entering into 
combination with any number of other atoms. For example, 
hydrogen, having only one electron, can only combine with one 
other atom at a time. On the other hand, elements with from two 
to seven electrons in their outer shells often combine with more 
than one atom at a time, as is instanced by the combination of 
one atom of oxygen with two atoms of hydrogen to form water. 
In order to have a working rule for predicting the number of 
atoms with which a given atom will combine, without going into 
the individual electron configurations (which, as we shall see in 
Chapter 4, can be more complicated than we have indicated here), 
it is usual to refer to the valency of an element; this quantity is 
defined as the number of atoms of hydrogen which will combine 
with one atom of that element. 



36 Introducing Science 

As one atom of hydrogen can only combine with one other 
identical atom, the valency of hydrogen is 1 ; furthermore, as 
oxygen combines with two atoms of hydrogen the valency of 
oxygen must be 2. The valency of all the other elements can be 
found from similar considerations, and as the valency of an 
element depends on the number of electrons in its outer shell, 
each group of the periodic table (p. 54) has a characteristic 
valency. However, it must be added that certain elements have the 
ability of combining in more than one way with other elements, 
and consequently these elements have more than one valency. 
This is a matter we shall refer to again in Chapter 4. 

RADIOACTIVITY 

We have said that there are ninety-two fundamentally different 
types of atom, each of which has a different number of protons 
in its nucleus; in addition most of these ninety-two different 
atoms have isotopes, the nuclei of which contain equal numbers 
of protons but varying numbers of neutrons. 

In our discussion so far we have regarded all these atoms as 
being unchangeable - existing eternally in exactly the same form, 
regardless of any chemical reactions in which they take part 
(except for the sharing and donating of outside electrons). We 
shall now explain that the nuclei of the heaviest elements are not 
stable, but are in a continual state of change to lighter elements. 
Such changing elements are said to be radioactive because during 
the process of decay to lighter elements they emit radiant energy. 
This radiant energy is of three distinct types, known as alpha (a), 
beta ($), 2nd gamma (y) radiations after the first three letters of 
the Greek alphabet. 

An explanation of the phenomenon of radioactivity is not 
possible without first describing the nature of these three types of 
radiation, and we shall therefore say a few words about each 
before discussing the elements which are radioactive. 

ALPHA RADIATION. This is really not a 'radiation' at all, as 
it consists of high-speed streams of helium nuclei. The helium 
nucleus, as we shall see in Chapter 11 , is a very stable arrangement 
of two protons and two neutrons, which is shot out of the heavy 
radioactive nucleus intact. These a-particles, as they are called, 



The Constitution of Matter 37 

after leaving the radioactive atom gradually slow down in the air 
as a result of collisions with the molecules which comprise the 
air, and as they do so they acquire orbital electrons, thereby 
becoming atoms of helium gas. 

When a radioactive atom loses an a-particle, its nuclear charge, 
and hence its atomic number, is decreased by two units (because 
it has lost two protons), but its atomic weight is decreased by 
four units (two protons and two neutrons). 

BETA RADIATION. Beta rays are electrons travelling at 
enormous speeds (up to about 99 per cent of the velocity of light), 
which are emitted from the nucleus of the disintegrating atoms. 
It must be made clear, however, that electrons do not exist inside 
the nucleus, but are created as a result of the conversion of a 
neutron into a proton within the nucleus. Again this is a process 
to which we shall refer in greater detail (Chapter 11). 

GAMMA RADIATION. Gamma radiation consists of very short 
wave X-rays which are emitted as a result of the disturbance 
caused to the nucleus by the ejection of an a or /J particle. The 
precise nature of y-rays will be discussed more fully in the 
chapter on radiant energy (Chapter 10). 

The Radioactive Series 

All the radioactive elements which occur in nature fall into one 
of three separate series, each of which is headed by one of the 
three heaviest elements in the periodic table. The parent elements 
of the three series are uranium (atomic number 92), protoactinium 
(atomic number 91), and thorium (atomic number 90). 

Each series consists of a train of transformations from one 
element to a lighter one, corresponding with the ejection from 
the nucleus of either an a or a /? particle, such transformations 
being accompanied by the emission of y-rays. 

The uranium series, illustrated in Table 2 (p. 38), starts with 
the heaviest isotope of uranium, which has an atomic weight of 
238. It will be seen from this table that after three a-particles and 
two /3-particles have been lost, the element radium is formed 
which has an atomic weight of 226. This is because three oc- 
particles weigh twelve atomic units (each being four units), and 
238 - 12 = 226. 



38 Introducing Science 

Table 2 
THE URANIUM SERIES 

Element 
Uranium 

Uranium Xi (Thorium) 

Protoactinium 

Uranium II 

Ionium (Thorium) 

Radium 

Radon 

Radium A (Polonium) 

Radium B (Lead) 

Radium C (Bismuth) 

Radium C' (Polonium) 

Thallium 

Radium D (Lead) 

Radium E (Bismuth) 

Polonium 

Lead 

The atomic number of radium is 
follows: 



Atomic 
number 


Atomic 
weight 


Particle . .-,.- 
. , Half-life 
emitted 


92 


238 


a 4,500 million 






years 


90 


234 


P 24 days 


91 


234 


jB 1-1 minutes 


92 


234 


250,000 years 


90 


230 


80,000 years 


88 


226 


a 1,600 years 


86 


222 


3-8 days 


84 


218 


a 3 minutes 


82 


214 


j5 27 minutes 


83 


214 


a and jB 20 minutes 


84 


214 


1 a ^ 10 ooo tn second 


81 


210 


v 1-3 minutes 


82 


210 


jB 20 years 


83 


210 


jB 5 days 


84 


210 


a 140 days 


82 


206 


Stable 



which is arrived at as 



The three a-particles lost by the 

uranium have a charge of 3x2=6 

The two jS-particles lost by the 

uranium have a charge of 2x( 1)= 2 

Net loss 4 

The atomic number of uranium is 92 y therefore the atomic 
number of radium is 92 4 = 88. Subsequently a further five 
a-particles and four jS-particles are emitted resulting in an atom 
of atomic weight 206 and atomic number 82; this atom, which is 
not radioactive, is the common isotope of lead. The actinium 
and thorium series are similar in general outline to the uranium 
series, and they also culminate in non-radioactive isotopes of lead. 
After reading the foregoing paragraphs it may be wondered 
why uranium, protoactinium, and thorium continue to exist on 



The Constitution of Matter 39 

earth if they are constantly degenerating into lead. In fact, 
uranium and thorium are still relatively common elements because 
their decay proceeds extremely slowly. The half-life period (the 
time taken for half of a given weight of an element to decay to 
the next lowest element in the series) of uranium and thorium is 
measured in thousands of millions of years. The commonest 
isotope of protoactinium (atomic weight 231), on the other hand, 
has a half-life of about 30,000 years and is consequently very 
rare indeed. 

The half-life periods of all the atoms in the uranium series are 
given in Table 3, from which it will be seen that the variation is 
extremely wide, ranging from thousands of millions of years to 
about a ten thousandth of a second in the case of one of the 
isotopes of polonium (Radium C'). 

It must be added that no chemical reaction or temperature or 
pressure effects will provoke a radioactive atom into disintegra- 
tion, or restrain it from doing so; furthermore, the process is 
fundamentally an uncertain one, being unpredictable for any 
single atom. Nevertheless the half-life periods given in Table 3 
are accurate for any appreciable quantity of matter, which will 
of course consist of many millions of atoms. These half-life 
periods are statistical averages, analogous say, to the estimated 
life-span of a human being as seventy years. This does not mean 
that any particular man or woman will die at the age of seventy, 
but that it is the average life of the species. 

This aspect of scientific uncertainty will be referred to again in 
Chapters 10 and 12, and radioactive disintegration will be dis- 
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 11. 



CHAPTER 3 

THE PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER 



IN our analysis so far, we have seen that the progressive sub- 
division of any quantity of matter yields the atoms of the elements, 
and finally the subatomic "particles of energy' - electrons, 
protons, and neutrons. 

We have also seen how the atoms of the elements are held 
together to form compounds, but we have not yet examined the 
manner in which the molecules of matter behave towards each 
other. This brings us to a discussion of the three physical states 
in which matter can exist, namely: the gaseous state, the liquid 
state, and the solid state. Each of the physical states will be dis- 
cussed separately, as in each case the molecules and atoms of 
matter have a different effect upon each other. 

GASES 

In a gas, the individual molecules move about the space which 
they occupy at very great speeds, and as there are enormous 
numbers of them in even a small volume, they are continually 
colliding with each other and with the walls of the vessel which 
contains them. As the molecules are so small and so numerous, 
it is not possible to measure the speed or number of collisions 
per second of each of them individually. However, the behaviour 
of a gas can be accurately predicted by calculating the mathe- 
matical average velocity of a large number of molecules according 
to the so-called Kinetic Theory of Gases. 

The pressure which a gas exerts is purely a result of the 
enormous number of collisions, and the high speed of impact, of 
the gas molecules with the walls of its container. If the tempera- 
ture of a gas is increased, the molecules move more rapidly, 
because energy has been imparted to them, and consequently the 
number and violence of the collisions are increased. It is for this 
reason that an increase in the temperature of a gas causes an 



The Physical States of Matter 41 

increase in pressure, and a decrease in temperature results in a 
decrease in pressure. In fact, the temperature of a gas is simply a 
measure of the energy of motion of its component molecules, 
as will be explained on page 131. 

In a gas the movement of the molecules is entirely at random, 
as they are too far apart to be able to exert any appreciable 
force on each other. The large amount of space between the 
molecules accounts for the fact that when pressure is applied 
from outside the gas, it can be compressed to a much smaller 
volume. 

A further fact of great importance concerning gases is that, 
irrespective of the chemical composition of the gas, equal volumes 
at the same temperature and pressure always contain the same 
number of molecules; this statement is known as Avogadrcfs 
Hypothesis, after the discoverer. Naturally the number of mole- 
cules in a given volume of gas will depend on the temperature and 
pressure to which it is subjected, but, if the pressure is the same 
as that of the atmosphere at sea-level, and the temperature is 
15C (59F), the number of molecules in one cubic centimetre 
(about the size of a small lump of sugar) of any gas is approxi- 
mately 27 million, million, million, and each molecule can expect 
to experience about 5,000 million collisions per second. 

We have already stated that the earth's atmosphere consists 
predominantly of a mixture of diatomic molecules of the gases 
oxygen and nitrogen (roughly 76 per cent nitrogen and 23 per 
cent oxygen); from what has been said about the Kinetic Theory 
of Gases, it will be understood that, as the molecules are con- 
tinually colliding with all the matter on the surface of the earth, 
they will exert a pressure uniformly over its surface. At sea-level, 
this pressure is equivalent to a weight of about fifteen pounds 
acting on every square inch of matter exposed to the atmosphere. 

LIQUIDS 

If the temperature of a gas is decreased sufficiently a stage will 
be reached when the speed of movement of the molecules is so 
reduced that they become close enough to exert attractive forces 
on each other. These forces differ from the forces that hold the 



42 Introducing Science 

atoms together in a molecule, but they are also electrical in 
character; in fact they result from the attraction between the 
positively charged nucleus of one atom and the negatively 
charged orbital electrons of the atoms in neighbouring molecules. 
Such forces are called molecular forces (or van der Wads' forces, 
after the discoverer). 

At that point in the process of reducing the temperature of a 
gas when the attractive forces between the molecules is sufficient 
to make them cohere, the gas is said to have become a liquid. In 
contrast to solids, however, the molecules of a liquid are still 
able to slide over one another, so that the bulk is able to adopt 
the shape of its container. 

Although the molecules in a liquid have lost their freedom to 
move at random within the container they do continue to vibrate 
and collide at great speeds. Nevertheless, in a liquid there is very 
much less space between the molecules than in a gas and conse- 
quently liquids occupy much less space than gases; for this 
reason, also, they can be compressed only slightly. 

Although it is of course not possible to observe the continual 
movement of the molecules in a gas or liquid with the naked eye, 
the random movement of a very fine particle of dust in a drop of 
liquid can be directly observed under the microscope. This move- 
ment was first noticed by a botanist, R. Brown, and is conse- 
quently known as the Brownian Movement. The movement of such 
a minute speck of dust is entirely at random because the 
collisions it suffers from the fast-moving molecules are also 

random. 

Some of the more rapid molecules at the surface of a liquid are 
able to overcome the molecular forces of their neighbouring 
molecules and escape from the body of the liquid into the gas 
above it: this process is called evaporation. As it is the fastest- 
moving molecules that escape, that is the molecules with the 
greatest energy, the average energy of the remaining molecules 
will be reduced, and hence the effect of evaporation is to cause a 
reduction in the temperature of the liquid. 

As a result of the continual escape of molecules from the 
surface of a liquid, the gas above it will contain a certain number 
of molecules of the liquid. This number will depend on the 



The Physical States of Matter 43 

temperature and the chemical composition of the liquid. How- 
ever, for a particular liquid, at a particular temperature, the 
average number of molecules escaping from the surface will 
always be the same, and the pressure these molecules exert is 
called the vapour pressure of the liquid. 

Clearly, the vapour pressure of a liquid will increase with rising 
temperature; but at a certain temperature the vapour pressure of 
the liquid will become equal to the pressure exerted by the 
atmosphere above it. At this temperature, called the boiling- 
point, the liquid is said to boil and become a gas. This accounts 
for the bubbles of gas that form in the body of a liquid when it 
boils. The above explanation also accounts for the fact that the 
boiling-point of a liquid is lower at high altitudes where the 
atmospheric pressure is lower. For example, water boils at sea- 
level at 100C (212F), but at an altitude of 1,500 ft it will boil 
at 98-3C (208-9F). 

SOLIDS 

If the temperature of a liquid is decreased sufficiently, the 
molecules are drawn so close together by the molecular forces, 
that at a certain point, called the freezing-point* the molecules 
themselves break down and the atoms arrange themselves into 
rigid patterns (called crystals), which are held together either by 
the electrovalent or the covalent forces which have already been 
described. At this point, the liquid is said to have become a solid. 
Nearly all solids exist as crystals (see below), which when heated 
become liquids at a definite temperature called the melting-point 
of the solid or the freezing-point of the liquid. There are, however, 
certain solids, such as glass and some resins, which are not 
crystalline in nature; such substances are described as amorphous. 
Amorphous solids do not have a definite melting-point, but when 
heated become gradually more and more pliable until eventually 
they assume the fluid properties usually associated with liquids : 
for this reason they are best thought of as * super-cooled 5 liquids. 

Crystals 

We have said that all solids, except those which are amorphous, 

exist as crystals, and we shall now discuss the three broad groups 



44 Introducing Science 

into which crystalline substances are usually classified. They are: 

1. Electrovalent Crystals 

2. Covalent Crystals 

3. Metallic Crystals 

ELECTROVALENT CRYSTALS. Such solids do not really exist 
as molecules, but as collections of ions held in a rigid structure 
by the electrovalent forces which we have described on page 33. 
A typical electrovalent crystal is common salt (sodium chloride - 
NaCl) which forms a simple crystal structure, as in Figure 8. 






sodium ion 
O chlorine ion 

Fig. 8 



It will be seen from this diagram that the ions of sodium and 
chlorine alternate throughout the structure, which is called a 
lattice, so that each cube formed is a repetition of all the others. 
Although it is necessary to illustrate the ions as occupying fixed 
positions, they are in fact vibrating about these positions while 
keeping within the general confines of the lattice. 

Apart from this simple cubic structure, there are some fourteen 
different systems which occur in nature. Of the cubic lattices 
there are three different types, namely the simple cubic lattice 
which we have illustrated for sodium chloride, the 'body-centred* 
which has an additional ion at its centre, and the * face-centred' 



The Physical States of Matter 45 

crystal which has an additional ion at the centre of each of its 
faces. 

We need not go into the details of crystal structure here, al- 
though it should be realized that the example of sodium chloride 
which we have illustrated is particularly simple as only two differ- 
ent ions are involved. Other electrovalent crystals, for example 
those of copper sulphate (CuSO 4 ), are much more complicated as 
in addition to an atom of copper, an atom of sulphur, and four 
atoms of oxygen they also include five molecules of water (called 
the water of crystallization). All crystals, however, are similar in 
principle to common salt in that the same lattice is repeated over 
and over again. 

All electrovalent crystals dissolve in water to form conducting 
solutions as a result of the liberation of ions from the rigid 
structure of the lattice, 

COVALENT CRYSTALS. Two types of covalent crystal are dis- 
tinguishable, Le., those in which the unit of structure is the 
molecule, and those in which the crystal itself is a giant molecule. 

The first type is the more common as most organic compounds 
form such crystals. In these structures the atoms of the molecule 
are covalently linked, but the only forces between the molecules 
are molecular forces and consequently these crystals are softer 
and more readily fusible than the crystals of salts which are held 
together by the powerful electrovalent bonds. 

In the giant molecule type of crystal each atom is covalently 
linked to its neighbour, and therefore such crystals are very hard 
and difficult to fuse. Typical of this class of crystal is diamond, 
which consists of carbon atoms bonded together in this way. 

METALLIC CRYSTALS. In pure metallic crystals the atoms of 
the metal are ionized, but as all the ions are the same they must 
all be positively charged. Metal atoms, therefore, are not held 
together by either electrovalent or covalent forces, but by a 
special bonding of their own. 

In metallic crystals the positively charged ions vibrate about 
fixed positions in the lattice, but the electrons which have left the 
outer orbits of the atoms are free to move about the crystal 
structure, so that the metal ions are, so to speak, immersed in a 
*gas' of electrons. This accounts for the fact that metals are good 



46 Introducing Science 

conductors of electricity - the free electrons are able to carry the 
current through the crystals. 

The theory of metal structure is a very complex subject, which 
has come into prominence during recent years as a result of the 
endurance that is required of the metal components of jet engines 
and rockets at very high temperatures. This subject is, however, 
beyond the scope of this book. 

TEMPERATURE 

We have said that the physical state of matter depends upon the 
extent of the movement and vibrations of the individual atoms or 
molecules of which it consists. We have also said that the energy 
of these movements and vibrations depends on, and is in fact a 
measure of, the temperature of the matter concerned. 

Thus by reducing the temperature of matter in the gaseous state 
it can be made to pass through all three physical states. For 
example, steam consists of water in the gaseous state - a reduction 
of its temperature to its boiling-point and liquid water results - a 
further reduction of temperature to the freezing-point and solid 
ice appears (see Figure 9). While it is true that all gases can be 



100C 



temperature 



steam 



boiling point 



water 



nop , _ freezing point 
"" melting point 



Fig. 9 

made to liquefy and finally solidify, some gases will only do so 
at very low temperatures; for example, oxygen liquefies at 
-183C and nitrogen liquefies at -195-8C. The fact that there 
is a difference in these temperatures enables the two gases to be 
separated from the atmosphere simply by reducing the tempera- 
ture of air in a special type of refrigerator. At 1 83C the oxygen 
liquefies out, leaving mostly nitrogen in the gaseous state. 
The inert gases liquefy at even lower temperatures; for example 



The Physical States of Matter 47 

neon does not become a liquid until a temperature of 245*9C 
has been reached and it does not solidify until -248-7C. 

Although all gases will liquefy and finally solidify, not all solids 
can be liquefied and not all liquids can be gasified. This is be- 
cause raising the temperature of some solid and liquid compounds 
causes them to decompose into their elements (or oxidize if they 
are heated in air) before they have had time to change their state. 

We have said that the reduction in temperature of matter in 
any state reduces the movements and vibrations of its component 
atoms or molecules. It is only logical to assume, then, that at 
some stage in the process of lowering the temperature, these 
movements and vibrations will cease altogether. Such a tempera- 
ture does, in fact, exist, and is called the absolute zero of 
temperature, although it is unattainable both in theory and 
practice because matter would cease to exist if the movement of 
its atoms and molecules came to a standstill. 

The absolute zero of temperature is 273 C: although un- 
attainable, it has been possible to approach to within very much 
less than a degree of it in the laboratory. We shall have more to 
say about the subject of temperature in general, and absolute 
zero in particular, in Chapter 8. 



CHAPTER 4 

INORGANIC MATTER 



IN Chapter 2 we outlined the general constitution of matter in 
terms of modern atomic theory, and in Chapter 3 we discussed 
the physical states in which it exists. During the course of these 
chapters we have had occasion to mention by name a few of the 
commonest elements and their compounds, but as there are 
ninety-two different elements and several millions of compounds 
occurring in nature, it is clear that we have hardly scratched the 
surface of chemistry, which comprises a systematic study of the 
properties of all the elements and compounds. 

Purely as a matter of convenience, the large group of com- 
pounds which are formed from the element carbon, and which 
are associated with living matter, are treated separately as the 
subject of organic chemistry (see next chapter), while all the other 
elements and their compounds form the study of inorganic 
chemistry with which we shall deal in this chapter. This may 
appear a somewhat alarming prospect, but as well over half of 
the ninety-two elements are extremely scarce, and therefore do 
not greatly concern us, the field is considerably reduced. 

In Chapter 2 we drew attention to the fact that the properties 
of the elements can be broadly classified by arranging them in the 
groups of the periodic table, and it is therefore a more detailed 
study of this table which will mostly occupy this chapter. How- 
ever, before discussing the periodic table in greater detail it will 
be convenient to have in mind some of the commonest types of 
compounds which are formed in nature. 



RADICALS 

In addition to compounds which are made from various arrange- 
ments of only two elements, such as we have mentioned so far, 
we must now refer to the very many compounds which are made 
from more than two elements ; these compounds usually include 



Inorganic Matter 49 

groups of atoms called radicals. Radicals are formed by the 
covalent combination of certain elements with oxygen, and they 
are unstable unless they can combine electrovalently with other 
elements. The most common radicals are set out below together 
with their formulae and valency: 



Radical 


Formula 


Valency 


Sulphate 


SO 4 


2 


Sulphite 


S0 3 


2 


Nitrate 


NO 3 


1 


Nitrite 


NO 2 


1 


Carbonate 


C0 3 


2 


Phosphate 


P0 4 


3 


Hydroxide 


OH 


1 



All the compounds formed as a result of the electrovalent com- 
bination of an element with a radical are ionized (that is split into 
their ions) when they are dissolved in water, and they all fall into 
the category of either an acid, a base, or a salt. These three types 
of compound will now be mentioned separately. 

Acids 

Acids are formed by the electrovalent combination of hydrogen 

atoms and most radicals. The chief characteristic of acids is that 

in solution in water they yield hydrogen ions. The following 

equations give the formulae of the three principal mineral acids 

together with the ions they form when they are in solution in 

water: 

Sulphuric acid H2SO 4 -> 2H+ + SO 4 " 

Nitric acid HNO 3 -> H+ + NO 3 ' 

Hydrochloric acid HC1 -> H+ + Cl' 

The + sign indicates a positive ion, i.e. an atom which has lost 
one electron and therefore has a nuclear charge which is not 
balanced by an equal number of electrons. 

The ' sign indicates a negative ion, i.e. an atom or radical which 
has gained one electron more than is required to balance its 
nuclear charge. 

The * sign indicates a doubly charged negative ion, i.e. an atom 



50 Introducing Science 

or radical which has gained two more electrons than it requires 
to balance its nuclear charge. 

In the case of sulphuric acid, as the sulphate radical has a 
valency of 2, two hydrogen atoms are required to complete the 
stability of the group - hence the formula H@SO4. 

Nearly all acids are very corrosive to metals - an effect which is 
due to the facility with which metal atoms replace the hydrogen 
atoms of acids. A typical example is the reaction between zinc 
and sulphuric acid resulting in the formation of the salt zinc 
sulphate (ZnSO 4 ) thus : 

Zn + H 2 SO 4 -+ ZnSO 4 -h H 2 

Alkalis and Bases 

Alkalis are formed by the electrovalent combination of the 
hydroxide radical and most metals, or groups that behave as 
metals. The chief characteristic of an alkali is that in solution it 
will yield hydroxyl ions, as in the following typical cases: 

Caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) NaOH -+ Na+ -f OH' 

Caustic potash (potassium hydroxide) KOH -* K+ + OH' 
Slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) Ca(OH) 2 - Ca + + 2OH' 

In general this group of compounds may be extended to cover 
certain oxides, which, like the alkalis mentioned above, are able 
to neutralize acids; the word 'base' is used to include such oxides 
as well as hydroxides. 

Salts 

Salts are electrovalent compounds formed as the result of the 
neutralization of an acid by a base, a typical example being the 
formation of common salt, sodium chloride (NaCl), from sodium 
hydroxide and hydrochloric acid, thus: 

NaOH + HC1 -> NaCl -f H 2 O 

or saltpetre, potassium nitrate (KNO 3 ), from potassium hydroxide 
and nitric acid, thus: 

KOH + HN0 3 - KN0 3 -h H 2 O 



Inorganic Matter 51 

It will be noticed that in both the two examples above, the 

formation of the salt is accompanied by the formation of water: 

this is invariably the case and the definite rule may be stated that 

Acid -f base = salt + water 

The formation of water results from the combination of the 
hydrogen and hydroxyl ions, thus : 

H+ + OH' -> H 2 O 

As we have already seen, this combination is covalent and 
consequently the water molecules once formed do not ionize, 
although there will always be a very small number of uncombined 
ions in equilibrium with the covalent molecules. Furthermore, we 
may also mention at this point that the covalent water molecules 
in the liquid state are associated together into loose complexes, 
so that a liquid water molecule should really be written (H 2 O) n . 
On heating to its boiling-point, however, liquid water dissociates 
and steam exists as single H 2 O molecules. 

OXIDATION AND REDUCTION 

Apart from combining with certain elements to form radicals, 
oxygen, which is extremely reactive, will combine directly with 
most elements to form compounds called oxides, which we shall 
discuss shortly. The term 'oxidation*, however, has a somewhat 
wider significance than denoting the formation of oxides, as it is 
used to describe both the addition of oxygen, or the removal of 
hydrogen from an element or compound. 

The reverse of oxidation, that is the removal of oxygen, or the 
addition of hydrogen, is called reduction. 

Oxides 

As we have said, most elements form compounds with oxygen, 
indeed some elements form several different oxides. In general, 
the chemical properties of the different oxides depend upon the 
elements with which oxygen combines, so that several separate 
types of oxide can be distinguished. They are classified as follows : 
BASIC OXIDES. These are compounds of oxygen and metals, 



52 Introducing Science 

which react with acids to form salts. These oxides when dissolved 
in water form hydroxides (i.e. alkalis). For example, sodium 
oxide reacts with water to form sodium hydroxide: 

Na 2 + H 2 -> 2NaOH 

Basic oxides are always oxides of metals, and this fact is used as 
a definition of metals. 

ACIDIC OXIDES. These are compounds of non-metals and 
oxygen which react with bases to form salts. An example is the 
gas carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), which reacts with sodium hydroxide 
(NaOH) to form the salt sodium carbonate: 

C0 2 4- 2NaOH -* Na 2 CO 3 + H 2 O 

AMPHOTERIC OXIDES. Certain metallic oxides behave as both 
acidic and basic compounds, depending upon the circumstances; 
such oxides are said to be amphoteric. For example, aluminium 
trioxide (A1 2 O 3 ) behaves as a base when reacted with hydro- 
chloric acid to form aluminium chloride: 

A1 2 3 + 6HC1->2A1C1 3 + 3H 2 

Alternatively it will react with sodium hydroxide to form sodium 
aluminate (NaAlO^, in which case it behaves as an acidic oxide: 

A1 2 3 + 2NaOH -+ 2NaAlO 2 + H 2 O 

In addition to the three types of oxide mentioned above, there 
are also neutral oxides, compound oxides,, and peroxides, but the 
details of these compounds need not worry us. 



THE PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS 

In Chapter 2 we referred to the periodic table of the elements in 
which the ninety-two elements are classified according to their 
atomic numbers. We saw then that, by arranging the elements into 
nine vertical groups, each group was found to contain chemically 
similar elements as a result of similar configurations of their outer 
electrons. Before looking at each of these groups individually, it 
is interesting to look at the horizontal periods formed by this 
arrangement of the elements, and to note the development of 



Inorganic Matter 53 

chemical properties as we move across the periodic table from 
left to right. 

Referring then to Table 3 (p. 54-5), it will be seen that, apart 
from the first horizontal line in which only hydrogen and helium 
appear, there are six periods. The first two periods are called 
short periods as they contain only one element per group, while 
the remaining four are called long periods because there are at 
least two elements in each group (except Group O). 

In the first two short periods the properties of the twenty or so 
elements develop as each successive atom acquires an extra 
electron in its outer shell (see the diagram on page 32). In Group I 
the elements have only one electron in their outer shell, which 
they are able to donate quite readily in electrovalent combination, 
thus becoming positive ions. For this reason, these elements 
(which are called the alkali metals) are said to be electropositive. 
In general, the larger the atom, and therefore the farther the outer 
electrons from the nucleus, the easier it is for these valency 
electrons to be donated. Therefore the elements which are 
farthest down the group are the most electropositive. 

At the other end of the table in Group VII, the elements have 
seven electrons in their outer shells, which makes them willing 
electron acceptors (it being remembered that all atoms strive to 
complete the octet of their outer electrons, see page 32). These 
elements are called the halogens, and as they form negative ions 
by acquiring an electron they are said to be electronegative. As 
we have already seen, strongly electropositive elements form 
electrovalent compounds with strongly electronegative elements 
(e.g., the formation of common salt, NaCl, sodium being an 
alkali metal and chlorine being a halogen). 

In the first two periods of the table, then, there is a gradual 
change from the electropositive elements at one end to the 
electronegative elements at the other. In the middle are the ele- 
ments of Group IV (carbon and silicon) which have four electrons 
in their outer shell, and which are neither willing donors nor 
acceptors of electrons. These elements therefore form covalent 
compounds. 

After the two short periods comes the first long period which 
begins with the elements potassium and calcium. With these two 



54 



Introducing Science 

Table 3 

THE PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION 
OF THE ELEMENTS 



I 


II 


III 


rv 


V 


A B 


A B 


A B 


A B 


A B 












3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


Li 


Be 


B 


c 


N 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


Na 


Mg 


Al 


Si 


P 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


K 


Ca 


Sc 


Ti 


V 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


Cu 


Zn 


Ga 


Ge 


As 


37 


38 


39 


40 


41 


Rb 


Sr 


Y 


Zr 


Nb 


47 


48 


49 


50 


51 


Ag 


Cd 


In 


Sn 


Sb 


55 


56 


57* 


72 


73 


Cs 


Ba 


La 


Hf 


Ta 


79 


80 


81 


82 


83 


Au 


Hg 


Tl 


Pb 


Bi 


87 


88 


89f 






Fr 


Ra 


Ac 







Lanthanons 


57 


58 


59 


60 


61 


62 


63 


64 


65 


66 


67 


68 


69 


70 


71 




La 


Ce 


Pr 


Nd 


Pm 


Sm 


Eu 


Gd 


Tb 


Dy 


Ho 


Er 


Tm 


Yb 


Lu 


Actinons 


89 


90 


91 


92 


93 


94 


95 


96 


97 


98 


99 


100 


101 


102 






Ac 


Th 


Pa 


U 


Np 


Pu 


Am 


Cm 


Bk 


Cf 


E 


Fm 


Mv 


No 





Inorganic matter 



55 



VI 


vn 


VIII j 


A B 


A B 








1 




2 




H 




He 


8 


9 




10 





F 




Ne 


16 


17 




18 


S 


Cl 




A 


24 


25 


26 27 28 




Cr 


Mn 


Fe Co Ni 




34 


35 




36 


Se 


Br 




Kr 


42 


43 


44 45 46 




Mo 


Tc 


Ru Rh Pd 




52 


53 




54 


Te 


I 




Xe 


74 


75 


76 77 78 




W 


Re 


Os Ir Pt 




84 


85 




86 


Po 


At 




Rn 











56 Introducing Science 

elements the fourth electron shell is started, potassium having one 
electron in this shell and calcium two. Thereafter, however, the 
process changes as the fourth shell is stabilized with these two 
electrons, and subsequent electrons find their way back into the 
third shell. This procedure continues for ten elements until the 
third shell has expanded from eight to eighteen electrons; these 
ten elements are all metals, and as they all have only two electrons 
in their outer shell they all have similar properties. This is there- 
fore an example of neighbours in the horizontal periods having 
similarities instead of the more usual similarities we have noted 
in the vertical groups. 

Elements which have properties resembling those of their 
horizontal neighbours are called transition elements, but in general 
we may say that any element which has an incomplete inner shell 
is a transition element. Transition elements are characterized by 
having variable valencies, a property which they acquire as a 
result of the fact that under appropriate conditions electrons can 
be drawn from their penultimate shells into their outer shells 
where they become available for valency purposes. 

After the transition elements in the first long period, added 
electrons continue to fill up the outer shell until this fourth shell 
is completed with eight electrons in the rare gas, krypton. We 
may therefore illustrate the growth of the electron shells in this 
period as in Figure 10. 

K Ca Sc -> Zn Ga -* Kr 



1st shell 


2 


2 


2 2 


2 


2 


2nd shell 


8 


8 


8 8 


8 


8 


3rd shell 


8 


8 


9 18 


18 


18 


4th shell 


1 


2 


2 2 


3 


8 








(Transition 












Metals) 







Fig. 10 



The second long period is very similar in structure to the first, 
as it also contains elements in which the number of electrons in 
the fourth shell increases from eight to eighteen, while the fifth 
shell builds up from one to eight, again finishing with a rare gas, 
in this case xenon. The transition metals in this period are similar 



Inorganic Matter 51 

to those in the first long period, so that in this part of the table 
similarities extend both horizontally and vertically. 

The third long period is rather more complicated than its pre- 
decessors as it contains a group of fifteen elements called the rare 
earths or lanthanons, in which the fifth and sixth shells remain 
static with nine and two electrons respectively, while the fourth 
shell expands from eighteen to thirty-two electrons. Thereafter 
the fifth shell builds up to eighteen electrons and the sixth shell 
completes its octet with the radioactive rare gas, radon. 

The lanthanons therefore form a special family of Dinner- 
transition' metals with chemical properties which are extremely 
similar. We can illustrate the build-up of electrons in this period in 
Figure 11. 

Cs Ba La -+ Lu Hf-> Hg Tl -+ Rn 



1st shell 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2nd shell 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


3rd shell 


18 


18 


18 


18 


18 


18 


18 


18 


4th shell 


18 


18 


18 


32 


32 


32 


32 


32 


5th shell 


8 


8 


9 


9 


10 


18 


18 


18 


6th shell 


1 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


3 


8 



-e- Transition metals - 
Fig. 11 

The fourth long period is again very similar to its predecessor 
except that the group parallel to the lanthanons, in this case 
called the actinons, is incomplete. Indeed, only the first six 
members of this period of elements (francium to uranium) are 
sufficiently stable to occur in nature; the remainder, from atomic 
number 93 upwards, are so highly radioactive, with such short 
half lives, that they can only be made artificially by nuclear re- 
actions (which we shall discuss in Chapter 11). As the last 
naturally occurring element is uranium, the remaining members 
of the actinons are called transuranic elements. 

It is hoped that this short description of the horizontal view 
of the periodic table will enable us to understand the properties 
of the elements which we find in the vertical groups. 



58 Introducing Science 

The Sub-groups of the Periodic Table 

As we saw in Chapter 2, after the two simple short periods, the 
vertical groups of the table have to be divided into two sub-groups 
designated A and B; from what has been said in the last few 
paragraphs, it should be clear that the reason for this expansion 
is the accommodation of the transition elements. It is also neces- 
sary, for the same reasons, to introduce an extra group (Group 
VIII) into the long periods, each with three transition metals per 
period. It is only in this way that the complications created by 
the transition elements can be resolved within the framework of 
the table. 

In discussing the properties of the various elements, therefore, 
it will be necessary to distinguish between sub-groups A and B, 
and also to allocate the elements from the two short periods to the 
correct sub-group. This has been done in the presentation of the 
periodic table on pages 54-5. 

Finally, before saying a few words about the elements of each 
group, we should note that in Group O, which contains the rare 
gases, no sub-groups are required as these elements stand quite 
apart from the rest of the table on account of their extremely 
stable structure. 

GROUP i. In this group, unlike any of the other groups, the 
first two elements (lithium and sodium) closely resemble the 
elements of sub-group A rather than those of sub-group B. 
Furthermore, the elements comprising the two sub-groups are 
more dissimilar than those of the other groups; indeed, all they 
have in common is their univalency and the fact that they are all 
metals. 

The first two elements and those of sub-group A are, as we have 
said, called the Alkali Metals - they are lithium, sodium, 
potassium, rubidium, and caesium. Of these elements by far the 
commonest are sodium and potassium which occur extensively 
in nature in the form of their salts (e.g., sodium chloride, sodium 
carbonate, potassium nitrate, etc.). In the uncombined metallic 
state, sodium and potassium are soft whitish substances which 
are extremely reactive. They both combine violently with water 
to form basic hydroxides, thus: 

2Na + 2H 2 O -> 2NaOH + H 2 



Inorganic Matter 59 

The electropositive nature of these elements is shown by the 
properties of their salts, which are all freely soluble in water 
forming highly ionized solutions. 

Sub-group B consists of the three 'noble' or 'coinage' metals, 
copper, silver, and gold, which are characterized by their high 
melting-points (all around 1,000C) and the fact that they occur 
in nature in their uncombined metallic state, indicating that they 
are not very reactive. 

The reason for their unreactivity, despite their single outer 
electron, is that their penultimate shells consist in all three cases 
of eighteen electrons, so that if the single outer electron were to 
be donated, the penultimate shell of eighteen electrons would 
become the outer shell. As eighteen electrons do not make a 
stable outer shell, and as reactions only occur if a more stable 
structure can be expected as a result of them, these elements do 
not readily form electrovalent compounds. However, under 
certain conditions, electrons from the penultimate shell can 
migrate to the outer shell, where they become available for valency 
purposes, and some salts can be formed. Thus copper sulphate 
(CuSCU), in which copper has a valency of 2, is widely used as an 
insecticide, and the silver halides (silver bromide and silver iodide) 
are used in photographic emulsions. 

GROUP ii. In this group the first element, beryllium, resembles 
sub-group B, while the second element, magnesium, resembles the 
elements of sub-group A. All the elements in this group are 
exclusively divalent. Magnesium and the elements of sub-group 
A (calcium, strontium, barium, and radium) form a series of 
metals, called the alkaline earths, which are all strongly electro- 
positive, though less so than the alkali metals. They are all very 
reactive and are therefore found in nature in the combined state. 

Magnesium and calcium are the most common elements in this 
sub-group - magnesium occurring extensively in the form of its 
salts magnesium carbonate (MgCO 3 , also known as dolomite) 
and magnesium sulphate (MgSO 4 , also known as Epsom salts). 
Calcium carbonate occurs in vast quantities as chalk, and calcium 
sulphate also occurs widely in the earth's crust - being known as 
gypsum, alabaster, or plaster of Paris, depending upon the 
number of molecules of water contained in the crystals. 



60 Introducing Science 

All the alkaline earths, as their name implies, form strongly 
basic oxides and hydroxides, as for example calcium oxide (CaO, 
known as quicklime) and calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH) 2 , known as 
slaked lime). Radium, which is the last member of this group, is 
more important for its radioactive properties than for its chemical 
properties. 

Sub-group B includes, as well as beryllium, the metals zinc, 
cadmium, and mercury. In general, zinc and cadmium show con- 
siderable similarities to calcium and magnesium. Mercury, 
however, is rather exceptional, being the only metal which is a 
liquid at normal temperature and pressure. 

GROUP in. All the elements in this group are extremely scarce 
with the notable exception of aluminium which is, as we have 
seen, the third most common element on the surface of the earth, 
occurring very widely in the form of aluminium oxide (A1 2 O3, 
known as bauxite). Aluminium is a fairly reactive metal and 
readily forms an amphoteric oxide in air; it has a valency of 3, 
and most of its compounds are formed covalently. However, it 
forms an electrovalent compound with fluorine, and the com- 
mercial separation of the metal is carried out by the electrolysis 
(seepage 140) of aluminium fluoride which is obtained by heating 
bauxite and a fusible fluoride. 

Apart from aluminium, sub-group A includes the rare transi- 
tion metals scandium and yttrium, as well as all the lanthanons 
and actinons. As we have already said, the lanthanons are all 
extremely rare, and interest in them has centred round their 
electronic structure and their place in the Periodic Table, rather 
than in their use. They do, however, form compounds, exhibiting, 
in addition to the group valency of 3, several other valencies on 
account of the migration of electrons from the penultimate to the 
outer shell. 

The actinons are of importance because of their radioactive 
properties, which we shall be discussing together with their 
significance in the field of atomic energy in Chapter 11. 

In sub-group B, boron is the only element which is sufficiently 
common to be of any interest. This element occurs in nature in 
combination with oxygen in the form of borates, notably sodium 
borate (Na 2 B 4 O7, otherwise known as Borax). Its principal 



Inorganic Matter 61 

valency, like the other members of this group, is 3, and it forms 
covalent compounds (borides) with some metals. 

The remaining members of this sub-group, gallium, indium, 
and thallium, are all transition metals with the principal valency 
of 3, which form covalent compounds. 

GROUP iv. In this group, as in all the subsequent groups, the 
first two elements (carbon and silicon) are similar in character to 
the elements of sub-group B. However, these two elements are 
non-metals while the other members of the sub-group (germanium, 
tin, and lead) become progressively more metallic. Thus carbon 
in the form of diamond does not conduct electricity at all, but 
germanium is a semiconductor used in transistors, and tin and 
lead are typical metallic conductors. 

As a result of having four electrons in their outer shells, the 
elements of this group have a principal valency of 4, which leads 
to the formation of stable covalent linkages. In addition, in the 
case of the first two elements, it permits the formation of very 
stable linkages between identical atoms. Indeed, life itself has 
been possible only because of the stability of the carbon-carbon 
bond, and the enormously large and complicated molecules that 
are formed as a result of it. 

These, however, are aspects of carbon chemistry with which we 
shall deal in the next two chapters; here we need only mention 
that carbon and carbon compounds combine with oxygen, with 
the evolution of energy, to form the oxides carbon monoxide 
(CO) and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ). These reactions are the basis of 
combustion (see page 135) from which we obtain most of the 
energy for our civilization, for the fossil fuels (coal and oil) are 
predominantly carbon. Carbon dioxide is present in the earth's 
atmosphere to an extent of only about 0-03 per cent, but it is 
upon this small percentage that all life depends, for it is from 
atmospheric carbon dioxide that plants obtain their carbon by 
the process of photosynthesis (see page 105). As animals are 
dependent upon plants (and other animals) for their food, they 
too are therefore ultimately dependent for their carbon require- 
ments upon atmospheric carbon dioxide. 

The carbon removed in this way from the atmosphere is 
partly returned to it by respiration, and partly by the 



62 Introducing Science 

liberation of carbon dioxide which attends the decomposition of 
the dead bodies of plants and animals. Living matter thus main- 
tains a remarkably steady percentage of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere. Although most decomposing plant and animal 
bodies liberate carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, a certain per- 
centage of such decomposing matter finds its way below the 
surface of the soil where it has to decay in the absence of oxygen - 
over the ages this process has led to the formation of the fossil 
fuels. The combustion of these fuels by man for the production 
of energy is, as we have seen, again accompanied by the formation 
of carbon dioxide which returns to the atmosphere. 

In addition to these processes, atmospheric carbon dioxide is 
absorbed by sea water, whence it is converted into the calcium 
carbonate (CaCO 3 ) of the shells of aquatic animals. We may, 
therefore, represent the natural carbon cycle as in Figure 12. The 



food 




combustion and photosynthesis 




respiration and 
decomposition 



j 



CARBONATES OF 
SEA SHELLS 



Fig. 12 

other oxide of carbon, carbon monoxide, does not occur in 
nature, but it is an important constituent of coal gas and is, of 
course, extremely toxic. 

The next element of this group is silicon, which is the second 
most abundant element in the earth's crust, occurring principally 
as silica (SiO 2 ) in the form of sand, flint, and quartz. Like carbon, 



Inorganic Matter 63 

silicon atoms are also able to combine with other silicon atoms, 
but the Si Si bond is considerably weaker than the C C bond. 
For this reason the chemistry of silicon is much less extensive 
than that of carbon, although an interesting group of compounds 
called silicones have recently been artificially developed in imita- 
tion of the elementary organic carbon compounds. 

Of the remaining elements of this sub-group not much need be 
said except that tin (stannous) compounds are more stable than 
germanium compounds and lead compounds are more stable still. 

In sub-group A are found the elements titanium, zirconium, 
and hafnium, three transition metals with exceptionally high 
melting-points which combine actively with oxygen, nitrogen, and 
carbon. This property is made use of by adding small quantities 
of titanium and zirconium to steels with the object of increasing 
their mechanical strength by removing gaseous impurities trapped 
within the metal. 

GROUP v. The first two elements of this group (nitrogen and 
phosphorus), and the elements of sub-group B (arsenic, antimony, 
and bismuth), form a graded series from the gaseous nitrogen to 
the metallic bismuth. Of these elements nitrogen and phosphorus 
are the most interesting, both being of great significance in the 
chemistry of life. Nitrogen, as we have already mentioned, is 
present in the earth's atmosphere to an extent of over 75 per cent, 
and although it is unreactive in the diatomic gaseous form, it will 
react with some metals at high temperatures and forms important 
compounds with hydrogen (ammonia, and ammonium salts) 
as well as with oxygen (oxides, nitrates, and nitrites). 

In Chapter 6 we shall discuss the part played by nitrogenous 
organic compounds in biochemistry. All living matter acquires its 
nitrogen, like carbon, from plants, which in turn obtain it from the 
soil in the form of nitrates and ammonium salts. Again there is a 
cycle between living matter and the soil, as nitrates and ammonium 
Salts are returned to the earth by the excretions of animals and 
the decomposition of plant and animal bodies. In this case the 
decomposition depends on the activities of bacteria in the soil 
which convert the organic matter into nitrates and free nitrogen 
which escapes into the atmosphere. A certain amount of 
atmospheric nitrogen is converted into ammonium nitrate by 



64 Introducing Science 

lightning and is washed back into the soil by rain. In addition 
some bacteria which live in the roots of certain leguminous 
plants are able to convert atmospheric nitrogen into nitrogenous 
foods for these plants. However, heavily cultivated soil does not 
obtain sufficient nitrogen in any of these ways and therefore 
nitrogen has to be added in the form of manure or artificial 
fertilizers. The general nitrogen cycle in nature can be illustrated 
as in Figure 13. 

We have mentioned the compound ammonia (NH 3 ) which 
results from the covalent combination of one nitrogen atom with 
three hydrogen atoms; this compound is a gas, with a well-known 
pungent odour, which has the property of being able to collect 
an extra hydrogen ion forming the so-called ammonium ion 
NHJ. This ion forms electrovalent salts with the various radicals 
in much the same way as a metal and it is these salts which are 
used as fertilizers. 

Phosphorus and the other elements of sub-group B also form 
volatile hydrides similar to ammonia, but they do not form stable 
ions capable of electrovalent combination. In Chapter 6 we shall 
see that phosphorus in the form of organic phosphates plays a 
vital part in the storing of energy by living organisms. 

Sub-group A of Group V contains the rare transition metals 
vanadium, niobium, and tantalum, which are used in small 
quantities in steel alloys to confer the properties of high chemical 
resistance and stability at high temperatures. 

GROUP vi. In this group the first two elements (oxygen and 
sulphur) form a series of non-metals with the elements of sub- 
group B (selenium, tellurium, and polonium), while sub-group A 
contains the transition metals chromium, molybdenum, and 
tungsten. These transition metals, however, are much more akin 
to the transition elements of sub-groups VA and VIIA than they 
are to sub-group B of Group VI. 

Oxygen, as we have said, is the most common element on the 
surface of the earth, the atmosphere containing about 25 per cent 
of the diatomic gas and water containing nearly 90 per cent by 
weight of the combined element. Combined oxygen also occurs 
widely in the radicals of salts, as well as in oxides. Oxygen is 
highly reactive, combining in a number of ways with most 



Inorganic Matter 



65 



CO 

w 

h ( 

*4 
P 




to 

E 



66 Introducing Science 

elements - we have already given a brief description of the various 

types of oxides so formed. 

Sulphur, like oxygen, has the group valency of 2, and forms a 
volatile hydride, hydrogen sulphide (H 2 S), which is similar in 
construction to the hydride of oxygen, i.e. water. However, 
hydrogen sulphide is a gas at normal temperatures and pressures, 
and it is therefore surprising that water, which is after all a 
lighter molecule, should be a liquid. This is due to the association 
of water molecules which was mentioned on page 51. 

Sulphur forms two common oxides, a dioxide (SO 2 ) and a 
trioxide (SO 3 ), both of which are gases. The dioxide dissolves in 
water to form sulphurous acid (H 2 SO 3 ), the salts of which are 
called sulphites, while the trioxide dissolves in water to form 
sulphuric acid (H 2 SO 4 ), the salts of which are called sulphates. 

The transition metals of sub-group A are, as we have said, 
similar to their horizontal neighbours, exhibiting variable 
valencies, in most cases from 3 to 6. Again, due to their high 
melting-points and resistance to chemical attack, they are 
valuable for the properties they impart to steels with which they 
are alloyed. 

GROUP vn. This group contains in its sub-group B the most 
electronegative of all the elements - the halogens (fluorine, 
chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine), while sub-group A con- 
tains the very dissimilar transition metals manganese, technetium, 
and rhenium. Of these elements two, astatine and technetium, do 
not occur in nature as they are too unstable, and they have only 
become known as a result of the transmutation of other elements. 

The halogens have seven electrons in their outer shell, and being 
thus only one electron short of the rare-gas structure they are 
. very reactive. The most reactive of all is fluorine, which will com- 
bine with most elements vigorously; although the other halogens 
behave similarly in this respect, they do so with decreasing vigour. 

All the halogens form strong acids with hydrogen, hydro- 
chloric acid, which we have already mentioned, being of wide 
industrial application. Hydrofluoric acid (HF) reacts with silicates 
and therefore attacks glass, and for this reason it has to be stored 
in either lead, plastic, or wax containers. Because of their ability 
to replace hydrogen atoms in covalent linkages, the halogens 



Inorganic Matter 67 

enter into many organic compounds, which we shall mention in 
the next chapter. 

Of the sub-group A metals, only manganese is at all common 
in nature; it is a typical transition element showing all the 
valencies from 1 to 7 except 5, and again it is used as a constituent 
in both ferrous and non-ferrous alloys. The element hydrogen is 
often included in this group (as it has been in Table 3, p. 54), 
although it clearly fits into neither sub-group A nor B. In fact 
it has no well-defined position in the table as its solitary electron 
gives it a unique structure. It is, however, the simplest, the 
lightest, and the most abundant element in the universe, and, as 
we shall see in Chapter 12, all the other elements are made from 
it in the interior of certain stars. On the earth it occurs only to a 
tiny extent in the free state, although in the combined state it is 
very common as water contains over 10 per cent hydrogen by 
weight. Furthermore nearly all organic compounds contain 
hydrogen, as we shall see in the next chapter. 

GROUP vii i. The nine transition metals contained in this group 
are rather difficult to treat comparatively although several ways 
have been devised of doing so. However, the first three, iron, 
cobalt, and nickel, differ from the other six metals in that they are 
much more reactive and rarely exhibit a greater valency than 3. 

Iron is, for us, one of the most important elements which 
occurs on earth, as it has been the basic material of construction 
of our civilization. As it is readily oxidized it hardly ever occurs 
free in nature, but is widely distributed in the form of the ores 
haematite (Fe 2 O 3 ) and magnetite (Fe 3 O 4 ) from which the metal 
is obtained by reduction in a blast furnace. A very large pro- 
portion of the so-called 'pig-iron* produced by blast furnaces is 
converted into steel by the incorporation of a small quantity of 
carbon. As we have already mentioned, many of the other 
transition metals are also added to steels to give them special 
properties. 

Iron forms two series of salts, the ferrous salts derived from 
ferrous oxide (FeO) and the ferric salts derived from ferric oxide 
(Fe 2 O 3 ) Iron is unique in its magnetic properties, although cobalt 
and nickel are both slightly magnetic. It is considerably more 
reactive than either cobalt or nickel, both of which are added to 



68 Introducing Science 

special steels in order to confer the properties of resistance to 
chemical attack, particularly oxidation. 

The other six metals in the group (ruthenium, rhodium, 
palladium, osmium, iridium, and platinum) are often known 
collectively as the 'platinum metals'; they are all extremely rare 
and unreactive. Platinum and palladium are widely used as 
industrial catalysts (substances which increase the speed of 
chemical reactions without actually talcing part in them; see 
page 100). 

GROUP o. As we have already said, the rare gases have com- 
plete octets of outer electrons and therefore form no compounds; 
consequently they have no chemistry. 

These gases are all found to a small extent in the earth's 
atmosphere, the commonest, argon, being present to an extent of 
nearly 1 per cent. As we shall see in Chapter 12, helium is present 
in the sun as a result of thermonuclear reactions. All these gases 
are of industrial use on account of their unreactivity and are used 
for filling electric lamps and providing a non-reactive atmosphere 
for welding oxidizable metals. 



CHAPTER 5 

ORGANIC MATTER 



IN the last chapter, it was mentioned that Group IV of the 
periodic table contains the element carbon which, owing to its 
valency of 4, has the remarkable property of combining with 
itself as well as with other elements, so that it is able to produce 
very large molecules. 

Organic chemistry is the study of such compounds of carbon. 
At the beginning of the section on matter, it was stated that 
organic chemistry is the study of matter from which living things 
are, or have been, made, and this is so because nearly all matter 
that is, or has been, living consists of compounds of the element 
carbon. In fact, it is the ability of carbon to combine with itself 
and form large molecules that has made life possible - such con- 
siderations, however, belong to biochemistry (Chapter 6). 

It must be added, here, that modern organic chemistry has been 
extended to cover the study of such man-made materials as 
synthetic resins and fibres. While it is true that these compounds 
are manufactured in factories and laboratories, and are not 
* organic ' in the sense that they are made by natural processes, they 
are all derived from coal, oil, or other fossil, animal, or vegetable 
products. 

Organic compounds are divided into two main groups, 
depending on their structure, namely: 

1. Aliphatic or straight-chain molecules 

2. Cyclic or ring-shaped molecules 

In the more complicated large organic compounds a combination 
of both types is quite common. Each of the above two main 
groups can be subdivided into smaller groups as will be seen 
from the following outline. 

ALIPHATIC COMPOUNDS 

Aliphatic compounds are subdivided into three principal types, 
all of which are based on covalent bonds (see page 34) between 



70 Introducing Science 

the carbon atoms, but in each type the number of such bonds 
differs, as will be explained below. The three types of aliphatic 
compounds are: 

1 . The paraffins. 

2. The olefins. 

3. The acetylenes. 

Each type must now be described separately. 

THE PARAFFINS. In all these compounds the atoms are linked 
to each other by single covalent bonds, as in Figure 14. This 
compound is called methane (marsh gas), and has the formula 




Fig. 14 

As the covalent bond is extremely common in organic 
chemistry, for simplicity it is usual to depict a covalent pair of 
shared electrons as a single line, so that the methane molecule is 

usually written: 

H 

H C H 

H 

This molecule, methane, is the first and the simplest member of a 
whole series of paraffin molecules of increasing size. Each 
member of the series is called a homologue, and each homologue 
is formed by replacing one hydrogen atom with an additional 
carbon atom. Thus the second member of the series, ethane 
(C 2 H 6 ), is constructed as follows: 

H H 

H C C H 

J I 
H H 



Organic Matter 1\ 

As each carbon atom has a valency of 4, six hydrogen atoms, each 
providing one electron, are required to complete the octets of 
both carbon atoms. 

The next member of the series, propane, formula C 3 H 8 , has 
three carbon atoms: 

H H H 

1 ! I 

TT , y~1 fl. _ S~i TT 

I 1 I 

H H H 

In this and subsequent members of the series the inner carbon 
atoms require only two hydrogen atoms as they are linked on 
each side with other carbon atoms. It will be realized that an 
almost indefinite series of compounds can be built up in this 
way, with a general formula C tt H2+2- As the chain becomes 
larger, the molecules become heavier and consequently the higher 
homologues are liquids and higher still they become solids. The 
following table gives the commonest members of this group and 
their physical state at normal temperatures and pressures: 

Methane CH4 gas 

Ethane C 2 Hs gas 

Propane CaHs gas 

Butane C4Hio gas 

Pentane CsHi2 liquid 

Hexane CgHu liquid 

Heptane CyHis liquid 

Octane CgHis liquid 

Hexadecane Ct6H34 solid 



The paraffins exist in nature as the main constituents of petroleum. 
The refining process separates the heavier from the lighter 
members of the series. For example, petrol (gasoline) consists 
mostly of pentane, hexane, and octane, whereas kerosene con- 
tains mixtures of the various compounds from C 10 H 2 2 to Ci 6 H 5 4. 
The natural gas that is often found with oil, but sometimes alone, 
is itself used as a fuel, and consists of a mixture of the first four 
members of the series. 



72 Introducing Science 

Isomerism 

It will be realized that from the fourth member of the series 
onwards, more than one form of each molecule can exist, as will 
be seen from the following structural formulae: 

H H H H H H H 

111! ill 

H C C O C H or H C C C H 



H H H H H 



H 



H C H 



H 
Normal butane Iso-Butane 

When a compound can exist in more than one form in this way, 
the various forms are called isomers and the compound is said 
to be isomeric. Branching of the chains in such molecules can 
obviously occur more frequently in the higher homologues. For 
example Ci H 2 2 could have 159 isomers, although only two are 
known to exist. In many cases isomers have different properties 
from each other. 

Properties of the Paraffins and the Halogens 
The Paraffin Series of compounds are called saturated compounds 
because the carbon atoms have combined with the maximum 
number of hydrogen atoms, and for this reason this type of 
compound is relatively unreactive. However, the hydrogen atoms 
can be replaced quite easily with atoms of the halogen group of 
elements. For example, in the case of methane, one, two, three, 
or all of the hydrogen atoms can be replaced by chlorine, forming 
the following compounds : 

a a ci ci 

I I 1 1 

H c H ci c H a c H a c a 

I 1 I I 

H H CI CI 

methyl chloride dichloro-methane chloroform carbon 

CH 3 C1 CH 2 Cl, CHC1 3 tetrachloride 

CC1 4 



Organic Matter 73 

Similar compounds can be formed with iodine, bromine, and 
fluorine with all other members of the series. 

THEOLEFINS. The second type of aliphatic series is based on 
a double covalent linkage between the carbon atoms. The first 
member of this series contains two carbon atoms and is called 
ethylene C 2 H 4 . Using the same symbols as before for the electron 
pairs, this molecule is usually written: CH 2 =CH 2 . These com- 
pounds are called unsaturated, and as a result of their double 
bond they are able to take a further two atoms of hydrogen 
into their molecule. Consequently they are considerably more 
reactive than the paraffins. 

The subsequent members of the series, which have a general 
formula C n H 2ny exist either with their double bonds separated by 
two or more single bonds, as, for example: 

H H H H H 
H C=C C C=C 

i ! 

H H 

or with the double bonds separated by only one single bond: 



This second isomer is said to have a conjugated double bond. 
Butadiene, which is the basis of synthetic rubber, has a conjugated 
double bond as will be seen from its formula: 



The olefins may also have hydrogen atoms substituted by 
halogen atoms, in the same way as the paraffins. The compound 
vinyl chloride is simply ethylene with one hydrogen atom re- 
placed with a chlorine atom: CH 2 =CH.C1. 

As a result of their double bond many single molecules can be 
made to link up together forming a long chain. This process is 
known as polymerization and in the case of vinyl chloride the 
resulting polymer is the well-known plastic, polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC). The substance before it has polymerized is called a 
monomer (see p. 86). 

THE ACETYLENES. The third series of aliphatic compounds is 



74 Introducing Science 

based on two carbon atoms attached to each other by a triple 
covalent bond. The first member of the series, and the only one 
of any importance, is acetylene (C 2 H 2 ), which has the structure: 

H C-=C H 

Acetylene is a gas, obtained by adding water to calcium carbide, 
and is extensively used in the manufacture of organic compounds. 
It is also used for welding owing to the very hot flame it produces 
when burnt in oxygen. 

If acetylene is passed through a red-hot tube, the triple bond 
breaks down and three molecules join together into a stable ring- 
compound called benzene, C 6 H 6 , with the structure: 

CH 
CH ^CH 



CH .CH 



This compound is the basis of all the cyclic molecules which are 
described on page 80. The acetylenes have the general formula 



Substituted Aliphatic Compounds 

All the aliphatic compounds are able to form substitution 
products, in which one or more of the hydrogen atoms are re- 
placed by other groups of atoms. Some substitution products 
involving halogen atoms have already been mentioned ; other such 
compounds will now be described. 

As many compounds are formed by the substitution of only 
one hydrogen atom from the molecule, it is convenient to regard 
the groups CH 3 , C 2 H 5 , C 3 H 7 , etc., as radicals of the 
Paraffin Series. Similarly the group CH 2 =CH is the vinyl 
radical of the Olefin Series, and the group CH^C is the acetyl 
radical of the Acetylene Series. 



Organic Matter 75 

These organic radicals are covalently bonded to the groups or 
atoms with which they form compounds and not electrovalently 
as with inorganic radicals. 

Alcohols 

One of the most important groups of compounds results from the 
substitution of hydrogen atoms in organic compounds by the 
hydroxyl group OH. All organic compounds which contain this 
hydroxyl group are called alcohols. They differ from inorganic 
compounds which contain the OH group in that the method of 
bonding is covalent and not electrovalent, and consequently 
alcohols do not ionize in solution and are not bases. 

Each member of the Paraffin Series forms an alcohol, and the 
name of each alcohol follows the name of the paraffin which 
contains the same number of carbon atoms. The first and 
commonest members of the series are : 

Methyl alcohol (CHs OH), also called methanol or wood spirit. 
Ethyl alcohol (CzHs OH), also called ethanol (the intoxicant in 

alcoholic drinks). 

Propyl alcohol (CaH? OH), also called propanoL 
Butyl alcohol (C^ OH), also called butanol. 



Although the olefins and acetylenes also form alcohols, they are 
not of great industrial importance. 

The alcohols mentioned so far contain only one OH group 
in the molecule; several important compounds exist, however, in 
which more than one hydrogen atom is replaced by a hydroxyl 
group. The commonest compound, derived from propane, is 
glycerine or glycerol, which, has three hydroxyl groups, arranged 
as in the following structural formula: 

OH OH OH 

1 1 I 

CH 2 - CH - CH 2 

Compounds containing more than one hydroxyl group are 
called poly-hydric alcohols. 

If an alcohol is reacted with an inorganic acid, the compound 
formed is called an inorganic ester. Typical of such compounds is 
methyl nitrate, which is formed from methyl alcohol thus: 



76 Introducing Science 

CH 3 OH + HN0 3 - CH 3 ON0 2 4- H 2 O 
Methyl alcohol Nitric acid Methyl nitrate Water 

If glycerine is reacted with nitric acid in this way so that all 
three hydroxyl groups are nitrated, the resulting compound is 
called tri-nitro-glycerine, the explosive in dynamite. 

Ethers 

Another group of compounds of importance can be formed by 
allowing two molecules of alcohol to react together under certain 
conditions, so that a molecule of water is removed. For example: 



C 2 H 5 O j H + OH j C 2 H 5 > C 2 H 5 O C 2 H 5 + H 2 O 

ethyl alcohol di-ethyl ether water 

This type of reaction, in which a molecule of water is removed, is 
called a condensation reaction. In this particular condensation 
reaction the product is called an ether, and in the example given 
the compound formed is di-ethyl ether (the anaesthetic commonly 
known as * ether ') Similar compounds may be formed from other 
alcohols; for example, if a molecule of methyl alcohol is reacted 
with a molecule of propyl alcohol the resulting compound is 
called methyl-propyl ether. 

Carboxylic or Fatty Acids 

These acids result from the oxidation of alcohols. It is a common 

experience that wine left open to the air becomes sour and 

vinegary. This is due to the oxidation of ethyl alcohol to acetic 

acid (the main constituent of vinegar) which can be represented 

thus: 

H H H 
I I/H I ^O 

H 'C C^ becomes H C C x 

H H 

ethyl alcohol acetic acid 

All compounds which contain the carboxyl group 

^ f~\ 



Organic Matter 77 

are called carboxylic or fatty acids. Their acidity is due to the 
fact that in solution the carboxyl group ionizes, liberating 
hydrogen ions. 
The commonest fatty acids are given below; 

H.COOH - Formic acid made from methyl alcohol. 
CH 3 OOH ~ Acetic acid made from ethyl alcohol. 
C2H 5 COOH - Propionic acid made from propyl alcohol. 
C 3 H 7 COOH - Butyric acid made from butyl alcohol. 

The alcohols of olefins also form similar acids, an important 
example being acrylic acid, which is used in the plastics industry 
and has the formula CH 2 =CH.COOH. This compound forms 
the well-known plastic methyl methacrylate (see p. 87). 

Fatty acids form salts with inorganic alkalis in a similar manner 
to inorganic acids. For example, acetic acid and sodium hydroxide 
react together to form the salt sodium acetate and water, thus : 

CH 3 COOH + NaOH -> CH 3 COONa + H 2 O 
Acetic acid sodium hydroxide Sodium acetate Water 

These compounds ionize in water as the sodium atom is bonded 
electrovalently to the acetate radical; they are therefore true salts. 
If a fatty acid is reacted with an alcohol, a covalent compound 
called an organic ester is formed which does not ionize. A typical 
example is the formation of the ester, ethyl acetate, from ethyl 
alcohol and acetic acid: 

CH 3 COOH + C 2 H 5 OH - CH 3 COOC 2 H 5 + H 2 O 
Acetic acid Ethyl alcohol Ethyl acetate Water 

This is another example of a condensation reaction. Ethyl 
acetate is a liquid which is widely used in industry as a solvent. 
Higher esters are solid compounds; fats are the esters of 
glycerine and waxes are even higher complex esters. In general, 
animal fats are saturated esters, while vegetable fats are un- 
saturated esters. 

Aldehydes 

If an alcohol is dehydrogenated, that is has certain atoms of 

hydrogen removed, the hydroxyl group breaks up and the group 



78 Introducing Science 

CHO is formed. All compounds containing this group are 
called aldehydes. The formation of aldehydes from alcohols can 
be illustrated as follows: 



H C OiH: becomes H C=O + H 2 



H 
methyl alcohol 



H 

formaldehyde hydrogen 



Formaldehyde ('formalin') the first in the series of aldehydes, is 
used as a disinfectant and for preserving medical specimens. The 
second member of the series is called acetaldehyde (CH 3 CHO), 
and is made from ethyl alcohol. 

If aldehydes are oxidized they form fatty acids, and the names 
of the aldehydes are derived from the acids they form, not the 
alcohols from which they are made: 



H.COOH 
formic acid 
CH 3 COOH 
acetic acid 

QH 5 COOH 
propionic acid 



Ketones 

The structure of the ketones is somewhat similar to that of the 
aldehydes, except that the hydrogen atom in the aldehyde group 
CHO is replaced by a second organic radical, as for example in 
the first member of the series, dimethyl ketone: 



-H 2 




+0 


forms 




forms 


CH 3 OH ^ 


H.CHO 


v 


methyl alcohol 


formaldehyde 


1 J 


C 2 H 5 OH ^ 


CH 3 CHO 




ethyl alcohol 


acetaldehyde 


' '^ 


C 3 H 7 OH ^ 


C 2 H 5 CHO 


^ 


propyl alcohol 


propaldehyde 





This compound is better known as acetone and is widely used in 
industry as a solvent. A whole series of ketones can be formed, 



Organic Matter 79 

which like the ethers may contain mixed groups of radicals, as 
for example methyl-ethyl ketone. 

Amines 

If alcohols are reacted with the gas ammonia, a group of com- 
pounds called amines are formed by condensation: 

CH 3 OH + NH 3 -* CH 3 NH 2 -f H 2 O 
Methyl Ammonia Methylamine Water 
alcohol 

This compound methyiamine is a primary amine and is used as 
a refrigerant. Secondary and tertiary amines can also be formed 
as illustrated by the formulae: 

CH 3 . 

di-methylamine ;INH written 



, 
tri-methylamine CH 3 -^N written N(CH 3 ) 3 

CH^ 

Ammonia can also be made to react with the hydrogen atoms in 
the radical part of an alcohol molecule, as for example in 
ethanolamine, NH 2 C 2 H4 OH. Similarly, the tertiary com- 
pound tri-ethanolamine, (C 2 H 4 OH)3N, can be formed. This 
compound is a useful solvent in the paint industry. 

Summary of Aliphatic Compounds 

As several types of compound have been described a summary of 
their general form will probably be of use. Using the symbols R 
and R' to represent any organic radicals, the following com- 
pounds can be made: 

R OH an alcohol. 

R ONO 2 an inorganic ester. 

R O R' an ether. 

R COOH a fatty acid . 

R COONa the salt of a fatty acid. 

R COOR' an organic ester. 

R CHO an aldehyde. 

R CO R' a ketone. 

R NH 2 an amine. 




80 Introducing Science 

CYCLIC COMPOUNDS 

Cyclic carbon compounds are groups in which the carbon and 
hydrogen atoms arrange themselves into a ring-structure. The 
main group of cyclic compounds are the so-called aromatics 
which are based on the ring compound benzene, C 6 H 6 . 

It was stated in dealing with the acetylenes that if the gas 
acetylene is passed through a red-hot tube, a six-carbon ring- 
compound is formed with alternate double bonds. This has the 
structural formula: 

CH 

/ ^ 
CH CH 

II I which is often written simply as 

CH CH 
\ ^ 

CH 

This compound, benzene, is present in the distillation products 
of coal tar and is the basis of very many useful products. 

Coal Tar 

When coal is gasified in a gas-works to produce the gas with which 
we cook, the products of gasification are: 

A gas, consisting of carbon monoxide, hydrogen, nitrogen, 

methane, and ethylene which is used as town gas ; 

A liquid consisting of water and ammonia; 

Coal tar which is a viscous tar consisting of pitch, benzene, 

naphthalene, anthracene, cresols, and other cyclic compounds; 

A solid - coke. 

Coal tar is the source of nearly all the aromatic compounds and 
their derivatives which will be described in the following para- 
graphs. 

Despite the presence of double bonds in aromatic compounds, 
they do not behave as unsaturated compounds and are quite 
stable. Nevertheless, the hydrogen atoms can be replaced by 
other organic radicals, and the group C 6 H 5 , called thsphenyl 
group, can itself be considered as a radical, as for example in the 
compound phenyl chloride, formula C 6 H 5 .C1. Some important 
combinations of benzene with other radicals will now be described. 



Organic Matter 81 

TOLUENE - CtfHs-CHa. This is the first derivative of benzene 
in which one hydrogen atom is replaced by a methyl group : 

CH 3 

A 

CH CH 

1! ! 

CH CH 

\ S 
CH 

If this compound is treated with nitric acid it becomes nitrated 
forming mono-, di-, and tri-nitrotoluene. The last-named com- 
pound is well known as the explosive TNT. 

ANILINE - C 6 H 5 -NH 2 . In this compound one hydrogen atom 
of the benzene ring is replaced with an amine group : 



NH 2 




Aniline is the basis of many dyes and drugs. If aniline is reacted 
with sulphuric acid in a certain way, the sulphanilamide group of 
drugs are produced. The formula of sulphanilamide is: 



NH 2 




PHENOL - QH 5 -OH. This compound, also known as carbolic 
acid, is produced by the replacement of one hydrogen atom of 
the benzene ring by a hydroxyl group: 



82 Introducing Science 

OH 




This compound, unlike aliphatic compounds containing an OH 
group, is not an alcohol but an acid, owing to the fact that the 
hydrogen atom of the OH group is electrovalently combined 
with the rest of the molecule. Phenol is widely used as an 
antiseptic. 

CYCLIC CARBOXYLIC ACIDS. The simplest such compound, 
benzoic acid, QHrCOOH, is formed by the addition of the 
fatty acid group COOH to the benzene ring, thus: 



COOH 




If the carboxyl group is added to phenol, an acid called 
salicylic acid is formed with the structure: 

OH 

COOH 




This compound is the basis of aspirin. 

If two carboxyl groups are added to a benzene ring the resulting 
compound is phthalic acid, with the formula: 



COOH 
COOH 



Organic Matter 83 

NAPHTHALENE, C 10 H 8 . This compound, which is present in 
coal tar, is formed by the joining together of two benzene rings: 

CH CH 

CH C CH 

11 I 1 

CH C CH 

CH CH 



Naphthalene is itself well known for its use in moth-balls. It 
forms many derivatives in exactly the same way as benzene, and 
it is widely used in the dyestuffs industry. 



SYNTHETIC RESINS AND FIBRES 

Broadly speaking, it has been the need for a raw material capable 
of being easily and cheaply moulded into serviceable domestic 
articles that has led to the development of the synthetic-resin or 
* plastics' industry. Although certain substances which occur in 
nature have been tised in the past for these purposes, such as horn 
and shellac, they are relatively rare and expensive, and for some 
uses may have undesirable chemical or physical properties. Thus 
the search for a substitute for natural horn led to the discovery 
of Celluloid, while Bakelite was the outcome of an attempt to 
replace shellac. Synthetic resins, then, are amorphous substances 
manufactured by man, chiefly from the by-products of coal gasi- 
fication and oil refining, which have the property of becoming 
plastic on heating. They can therefore be moulded into any 
desired shape, quickly and cheaply, in high-pressure heated 
moulding presses. 

Resins which can only be used once in this way are said to be 
thermosetting, as once 'set* under heat they never regain their 
plasticity, while those which can be repeatedly remoulded by 
heating are said to be thermoplastic. It will be convenient to 
discuss the principal resins in common use under these two 
headings. 



84 Introducing Science 

Thermosetting Resins 

All synthetic resins are, as we have said, amorphous solids com- 
prising large molecules based on carbon. By describing one of 
these substances, Bakelite, we shall see how thermosetting resins 
are formed, and how they differ in structure from thermoplastics. 
The first stage in the manufacture of Bakelite consists of con- 
densing phenol (QH 5 .OH) and formaldehyde (H.CHO) mole- 
cules together to form long chains: 



OH H H OH 



OH 



II I it II ' " 

C\ CH HC CH C^ HC CH 




CH 



CH 



H H 



CH 



4-2H.O 



The chain illustrated here only includes three phenol molecules, 
but in practice very long chains are formed giving a liquid 
resinous substance. On standing, however, cross-linkages occur 
between the chains, so that a solid structure develops, thus : 




Organic Matter 85 

This is only a two-dimensional model, but in fact cross-linkages 
develop in three dimensions so that a 'honeycomb' network is 
formed. It is the cross-linkages of these true chemical bonds 
which give the thermosetting resins their strength and their 
resistance to heat, whereas the thermoplastics, as we shall see, 
have to rely upon the weaker molecular forces between their long- 
chain molecules. 

A similar group to the phenol-formaldehyde resins are the 
amino-plastics, of which the most common are formed from the 
condensation of urea, COCNH^, and formaldehyde molecules. 
These resins are used for light-coloured articles such as plastic 
tea-cups, for which the dark-coloured phenol-formaldehyde 
resins are unsuitable. 

Another thermosetting resin, which is also used as a synthetic 
fibre, is nylon, which has been built up by organic chemists in 
imitation of natural silk. In attempting to produce a synthetic 
material with greater strength than silk, which is a protein con- 
sisting of chains of amino acids linked together in a polypeptide 
chain (see page 101), a group of substances have been evolved, 
called super polyamides, in which fatty acids are condensed with 
amides. Nylon itself is formed by the condensation of adipic acid, 

COOH(CH2)4 COOH 
and hexamethylene diamine, 

NH 2 (CH 2 )6 NH 2 
with the result that a chain is formed thus : 

NH (CH 2 )6 NHCO(CH2)4 CO- 
Nylon is used as a plastic as well as a fibre, and in the latter form 
it can be drawn into threads which are stronger, finer, and more 
resistant to chemical attack than natural silk. 

We have mentioned only a few of the thermosetting resins - 
there are of course others with many interesting uses - but, as it 
is not our purpose to give an exhaustive list of all these products, 
we shall pass on to describe a few of the most prominent thermo- 
plastics. 

Thermoplastics 

As we have already said, thermoplastics differ from thermosetting 

resins in that their chains are not cross-linked with chemical 



86 Introducing Science 

bonds. At normal temperatures the molecules of thermoplastics 
are held together as amorphous solids only by molecular forces 
(see page 42), which at elevated temperatures are insufficiently 
strong to prevent the molecules from slipping over each other. It 
is for this reason that such substances become plastic whenever 
they are heated. In general, while we have seen that thermosetting 
resins are the result of condensation reactions, thermoplastics are 
the result of polymerization reactions. 

The earliest synthetic resin of all, Celluloid, and its more 
modern derivatives, are thermoplastics based on naturally occur- 
ring cellulose obtained mostly from cotton. Natural cellulose, as 
we shall see in the next chapter (page 108), is made up of chains 
of glucose units, and it is these chains which form the basis of 
all the cellulose plastics. 

Celluloid is made by mixing camphor with cellulose which has 
been nitrated (a hydroxyl group replaced by a NO 2 group). The 
disadvantage of this material is that it is highly inflammable; 
however, this difficulty has been overcome in the more modern 
derivative, cellulose acetate. In this case the hydroxyl group is 
not nitrated but is substituted by an acetyl (CH 3 COO) group. 
Rayon, a form of artificial silk, is made from cellulose acetate. 

Other important thermoplastics are the polystyrenes and the 
polyvinyls. Styrene is an unsaturated phenyl derivative of ethylene 
with the structure: 




This compound, which is a by-product of the oil industry, can be 
made to polymerize in the presence of certain catalysts, into a 
long-chain molecule giving a clear glass-like resin which is widely 
used in the radio and electrical industries. Similarly, vinyl resins 
are polymers of the vinyl group CH2==CH , the most common 
ones in use being polyvinyl chloride (PVQ, CH 2 =CH.C1, and 
polyvinyl acetate (PVA), CH 2 =CH.OOC.CH 3 . These two mole- 



Organic Matter 87 

cules can be made to polymerize together, and, in addition to 
their separate uses, the so-called co-polymer of PVC and PVA 
has its own valuable properties and uses. 

Another well-known resin of this type, based on the methyl 
ester of methacrylic acid (CH 2 =C(CH 3 ) COOH), is methyl 
methacrylate which has the formula: CH 2 =C(CH 3 ) COOCH 3 . 
This polymer, which is sold under the names of Perspex, Plexi- 
glas, and Lucite, has valuable optical properties which has led to 
its use in the moulding of cheap lenses. 

No survey of plastic materials, however brief, would be com- 
plete without mentioning casein, with properties falling between 
the thermoplastic and the thermosetting. This material is a protein 
found in milk in combination with calcium. The calcium caseino- 
genate is separated from the milk by using a coagulant such as 
rennet ; the casein so obtained is dried, finely ground, and moulded 
by a press into the desired shape. Up to this stage it is a thermo- 
plastic, but thereafter it is hardened into a thermosetting 
compound by the action of formaldehyde. Casein is widely used 
in knife handles, buttons, fountain-pen cases, etc. 



CHAPTER 6 

LIVING MATTER 



HAVING described the chemical nature of inanimate matter in 
some detail, we are now able to examine the chemistry of living 
matter. This study constitutes the subject of biochemistry, though 
the broader field, dealing with the classification and development 
of living organisms, is called biology. In this chapter, then, some 
of what we shall say properly belongs to biology and some to bio- 
chemistry: the boundary between the two subjects is not clear-cut. 



LIFE 

It is not known exactly when life first made its appearance on our 
planet, but it is estimated as being between 500 million and 3,000 
million years ago, as compared to an estimated age of the earth 
of at least 4,000 million years. Nor is it known whether life first 
appeared in one place on the surface of the earth at one particular 
instant of time, or whether it was spontaneously created at 
various places and at various times. We are, however, fairly 
certain that new life is not now being spontaneously created from 
inanimate matter - a subject we shall refer to again in our final 
chapter. As regards the distinction between that which is animate 
and that which is not, again we are unable to be rigid: as we shall 
see when we come to mention viruses, the difference is not as 
clear as it might at first seem to be. Nevertheless, as a working 
hypothesis, it is generally agreed amongst biologists and bio- 
chemists that living matter is characterized by the following 
properties : 

Reproduction - the ability to create a new generation. 
Respiration - the ability to use the oxygen of the atmosphere for 
the production of energy by combustion. 

Nutrition - the ability to obtain from the surroundings the 
materials required for growth and reproduction. 



Living Matter 89 

Excretion - the ability to dispose of waste products. 
Irritability - the ability to respond to such external stimuli as 
heat, light, etc. 

These characteristics may be summarized by saying that a living 
organism is self-replicating and self-regulating, 

The Cell 

Life, like matter itself, is quantized, that is to say there is a 
minimum unit of matter which can be said, according to the 
above definition, to be living. This unit is called a cell - an entity 
which we shall have to examine in some detail. 

Before doing so, however, it must be admitted that there is a 
great deal about the reactions which occur inside cells which we 
do not understand. Indeed, one fact stands out very clearly - the 
matter from which life is constructed, called in general protoplasm, 
is extremely complex. Whereas the largest inanimate molecules 
consist of either relatively few atoms or chains of many atoms 
which repeat the same simple structure over and over again, 
protoplasm contains very large numbers of atoms arranged in 
an orderly but non-repetitive manner. As we shall see later, the 
structure of the simplest proteins is only now beginning to be 
unravelled. One of the secrets of life then, perhaps the secret, is its 
ordered complexity ; this is a point which we shall return to again. 

For the present we must concentrate on the cells themselves, of 
which, we have said, all living things are made; the simplest and 
most primitive life-forms consist of only one cell, while more 
developed organisms are made up of large numbers, A man, for 
instance, consists of millions of different cells performing a variety 
of different functions. 

A cell, which may be between a tenth and a hundredth of a 
millimetre in diameter (there are exceptions both in shape and 
size), usually has two distinct forms of protoplasm - the cytoplasm 
and within the cytoplasm the nucleus. These two parts of the cell 
must now be described separately. 

THE NUCLEUS. First, the nucleus of a cell must not be confused 
with the nucleus of an atom; it is unfortunate that the same word 
is used to describe these two different entities. 



90 Introducing Science 

The nucleus of a cell in the resting stage (i.e. when it is not 
reproducing itself), is separated from the cytoplasm in which it is 
situated by a well-defined membrane. Within the nucleus, during 
the process of reproduction, which we shall shortly describe, 
distinct bodies appear called chromosomes, which control the 
characteristics which a cell will pass on to its progeny; specific 
characteristics being regulated by separate parts of the chromo- 
somes called genes. We shall have to say more about genetic 
inheritance shortly; the point to be made at present is that the 
function of the nucleus is to control the reproductive processes of 
the cell, and the characteristics which its progeny will inherit 
from it. 

THE CYTOPLASM. Apart from the nucleus, the cytoplasm of a 
cell also contains a large number of microscopic granules, fat 
globules, .and rod-shaped bodies called mitochondria. In general 
the function of the cytoplasm is the breakdown of food into 
energy and small molecules, and the synthesis of the structural 
materials of the cell. We shall discuss the biochemical reactions 
by which these processes take place in greater detail in the sections 
dealing with metabolism, but it should be noted here that while 
the cytoplasm has been called the factory of the cell, this distinc- 
tion between the functions of the nucleus and cytoplasm cannot 
be made too rigidly. 

Cell Reproduction 

In general the growth of all living organisms occurs not by the 
growth of the cell itself, but by multiplication of the number of 
cells. This multiplication occurs as a result of the contents of the 
cell being doubled by replication followed by fission into two 
roughly equal parts, a process known as mitosis (see Figure 15). 
In the first stage of cellular reproduction the chromosomes (which 
in the resting stage are not individually identifiable) appear in 
the nucleus, each of which on inspection with a microscope can 
be seen to consist of two identical filaments called chromatids. 
As these chromosomes contract and thicken the membrane 
separating the nucleus from the cytoplasm disappears, and at the 
same time a spindle-like structure develops in the nucleus at the 
centre of which the chromosomes arrange themselves. 



Living Matter 



91 




resting cell 



chromosomes and spindle chromosomes arrange 
appear, nuclear membrane themselves at centre 
disappears of spindle 




spindle fades, 

nuclear membranes reform, 
cytoplasm begins to divide 

m 



chromatids migrate 

to opposite ends 

of spindle 




two new cells formed, chromosomes fade 
Fig. 15 



During the next stage, the chromatids of each chromosome 
separate and migrate to opposite ends of the spindle, thus forming 
two identical sets. When this stage is complete the spindle dis- 
appears and two new nuclear membranes start to form, each 
enclosing one set of chromatids. 

In the final stage, the cytoplasm divides into approximately 
equal halves, each of which contains a newly formed nucleus. The 
two new cells thus created return to their resting state. The time 
that elapses between fissions depends on a number of factors, 



92 Introducing Science 

but the single-celled bacteria can double their numbers every 
half an hour in this way, if the conditions are propitious. 

In Figure 15 it will be seen that we have illustrated a cell which 
contains only four chromosomes. In fact the number of chromo- 
somes in a cell varies widely, depending upon the species to which 
it belongs. For example, human cells contain forty-six chromo- 
somes, while those of the fruit fly (Drosophila) have only eight. 
The small number of chromosomes, and the comparatively large 
size of certain cells of the fruit fly, make it a favourite laboratory 
specimen for experiments in genetics. 

As all single-celled organisms reproduce themselves in the 
manner which we have described, it is worth commenting that in 
a sense they can be said to be immortal (barring fatal accidents) - 
parts of them live for ever in the bodies of their progeny. 

Having given, in the barest outline, the structure and method of 
reproduction of single-celled organisms, we may now investigate 
the way in which they have evolved into multicelled creatures, 
and, in particular, into man. 



EVOLUTION 

We shall return in the last chapter of this book to a summary of 
the current views concerning the origin of animate from in- 
animate matter. For the present purpose we must assume that 
some hundreds of millions of years ago there appeared (either in 
one place or in many places - it does not matter which) single- 
celled living organisms capable of regulating themselves and 
reproducing themselves in the manner which we have described. 
It may be that these primitive organisms were similar to the 
bacteria with which we are familiar, or it may be that they were a 
good deal more elementary even than these organisms. The 
essential, and generally accepted, hypothesis is that life as we 
have defined it originated with unicellular organisms, almost 
certainly in the sea. 

Now we have said that living organisms are characterized by 
their ability to regulate and replicate themselves, processes which 
we are able, in general terms, to describe with reference to matter 



Living Matter 93 

and energy. But there remains a third characteristic of living 
matter which we have not yet been able to explain in these 
material terms. This third characteristic is the will to survive - and 
in this sense survival implies not only the continued existence of 
the organism itself, but also its perpetuation by reproduction. 
Whether or not it will ever be possible to describe this character- 
istic of life in terms of chemistry and physics has long been a 
subject of debate. According to the mechanistic view, the will to 
survive, or the life-force, as it has been called, is no more than 
the sum of the physico-chemical properties of the component 
materials of the cell. On the other hand, there are those who 
believe that life has some metaphysical property which cannot be 
either expressed or interpreted in terms of the senses. Until a good 
deal more information is available concerning the biochemistry 
of the cell, this intriguing problem must remain unanswered; 
attempts at an answer in the present state of our knowledge must 
necessarily involve making assumptions which may well turn out 
in the future to have been unjustified. 

In spite of our inability to understand it, the will to survive 
has, over the millions of years that life has inhabited the earth, 
been expressed in what is called evolution; that is the adaptation 
of living forms to their environment in such a way that they 
stand the best possible chance of perpetuating their species. 

In the early stages of life on earth, the hazards presented by the 
environment were inanimate - broadly speaking the inclemency of 
the elements - but as life developed, or evolved, it became self- 
predatory so that the weaker and the smaller were consumed, or 
deprived of their food, by the stronger and the bigger. Thus only 
the best-adapted forms, that is the fittest organisms, were able to 
survive. These statements clearly imply that changes occur in the 
form of living matter in the course of its struggle to survive, and 
we must therefore now consider the mechanism of these changes. 
We have said earlier that inherited characteristics are controlled 
by the chromosomes which appear in the nucleus of a cell during 
mitosis, and that the individual inherited characteristics are 
controlled by the genes which form part of the chromosomes. It 
is therefore obvious that if genes remain unchanged for all time, 
there could be no evolution - that is no possibility of life-forms 



94 Introducing Science 

fundamentally changing their characteristics so as to be better 
adapted to their environment. 

But in fact genes do not remain unchanged, they mutate (or 
alter) from time to time in a random manner, often as a result of 
exposure to ionizing radiations. In Chapter 10 we shall have 
something more to say about these radiations; for the present it 
must be accepted that there is a low level of background ionizing 
radiation from radioactive elements in the earth's crust and 
cosmic-ray reactions (see page 188, and page 190 for the effect of 
nuclear weapons). There are undoubtedly other undiscovered 
causes of genetic mutation, but the effect of ionizing radiations 
is confirmed by the fact that mutations can be brought about in 
the laboratory as a result of irradiation by such ionizing radiations 
as X-rays and /-rays. 

Now these random mutations which occur in nature will pro- 
duce a wide variety of changes in the characteristics which an 
organism inherits, most of which will be to its disadvantage, but 
a few of which may be beneficial. Those characteristics which 
prove to be a disadvantage will either result in the death of the 
organism or will lead to a weak strain which will fare badly in 
competition with strains better adapted to cope with the vicissi- 
tudes of life. On the other hand, mutations which result in the 
inheritance of beneficial characteristics will give rise to strains 
that stand a better chance of survival than any other. This, then, 
is nature's way of selecting those forms of life which are best 
adapted for survival. 

The whole history of evolution is a catalogue of this process, 
but we may take one example to illustrate the point. Imagine a 
primitive form of fish, which as a result of a genetic mutation, 
say some 300 million years ago, gave birth to an offspring whose 
fins were 'deformed' in such a way that it found that it was able 
to propel itself along the bottom of the sea-bed by 'walking* on 
its deformed fins. This fortunate fish would then be capable of 
exploring areas of very shallow water in which other fish would 
not dare to venture for fear of being stranded, and it would 
thereby gain an advantage in the relentless search for food. 
Consequently its progeny, which would also inherit this character- 
istic, would develop into a species specially selected by nature for 



Living Matter 95 

survival. We may imagine just such a step as this in the evolution 
of amphibian from fish. Clearly a great deal of time, that is to 
say a great many generations, would be required to make any 
progress in the development of limbs as we know them, but, as it 
has taken some 500 million years for man to evolve from the 
first life-forms, this is in no way an obstacle to the theory of 
evolution. 

But this is anticipating: we must return now to our primitive 
unicellular organism. It will be obvious that a single-celled 
organism reproducing by fission alone does not provide a great 
deal of scope for the sort of competitive evolution we have been 
discussing. In fact, it can be observed in the laboratory that after 
many successive generations of reproduction by fission, in the 
absence of any spectacular mutations, cells often develop a degree 
of laziness that can be expressed as the loss of the will to survive. 

At some stage, then, in the development of unicellular organ- 
isms, a new stimulus was required to augment the effect of genetic 
mutation. This stimulus was provided by an amended form of 
reproduction - reproduction by the fusion of two cells instead 
of the fission of one. This was the first step towards sexual 
reproduction, and it was undoubtedly taken when evolution had 
only reached the stage of the more complex unicellular organisms. 

The benefit of this form of reproduction is achieved as a result 
of the contents of two nuclei being pooled in such a way that a 
new cell is formed which inherits half its chromosomes from each 
of its parent cells. This cell then reproduces by fission in the 
normal way, but is invigorated by the admixture of the contents 
of the two genetic reservoirs. The cells capable of fusion in this 
way are called gametes, and the fertilized cell, produced as a 
result of the fusion of the two gamete nuclei, each of which has 
half the normal number of chromosomes, is called a zygote. 

With the development of reproduction by fusion the stage was 
set for the next step towards greater complexity and greater 
adaptation of species - the multicellular organism. But this step 
was almost certainly taken by way of the half-measure of a cell 
colony. Once a group of cells had, by living together in a colony, 
enhanced their survival value, it could only have been a matter of 
time before some of the cells in the colony developed specialized 



96 Introducing Science 

functions; thus certain cells would perform particular tasks 
necessary to the survival of the colony while other cells would 
perform quite different functions. Clearly the first and most im- 
portant specialized function would be that of reproducing another 
set of cells aware of the advantages of colonial life. Reproduction 
of the whole assembly of cells would then become the specific 
task of one particular cell whose genetic material would contain 
the information that living in a colony was a beneficial practice. 

Fission would not be a suitable way for such a highly special- 
ized cell to reproduce, whereas the fusion of one such ceil with 
another from a different colony, or a different part of the same 
colony, would have the advantage of sharing the 'secrets of 
survival' that each had learnt. In time these cells specific to the 
function of reproduction evolved into the female eggs and the 
male sperms which characterize sexual reproduction in the higher 
life-forms. Of course, as cell colonies developed into multicellular 
organisms, the reproductive cells would not be the only ones to 
specialize their function : every cell in the organism would develop 
in such a way that it became specialized, or differentiated as the 
correct term is, so that it could only perform one function. 
Groups of these differentiated cells within the organism would 
then combine to form the tissues and organs of the highly 
developed creatures with which the earth now abounds. 

This is not the place to set out the details of the process of 
evolution, but in Figure 16 we give a very incomplete and 
schematic diagram illustrating its general trend. The time-scale 
is, of course, extremely approximate - such figures are obtained 
from a geological assessment of fossils and cannot therefore be 
expected to be accurate. 

In this diagram we have used an abridged form of the inter- 
nationally agreed system of classification, in which life-forms are 
successively divided into kingdoms, sub-kingdoms, phyla, classes, 
orders, families, genera, and finally species. 

It will be seen from the diagram that very early in the history 
of life, while it was still in the unicellular form, it divided into the 
two kingdoms of animals and plants. The essential difference 
between these kingdoms is that while most plants are able to 
make the organic molecules which they require by photosynthesis 



Living Matter 



97 



HOMO SAPIENS 



ARACHNIDA 
(spiders) 



AMPHIBIA 
(toads, etc.) 




W 

tJO 

W 



ARTHROPODA 

(outer skeleton) 



ANNELIDA 




-100 



-200 



300 



-400 






-500 



FIRST CELL(S) 
Fig. 16 



time-scale 

in millions 

of years. 



98 Introducing Science 

(see page 105), animals are without this ability and therefore 
depend for their food either on plants or on other animals. 

Animals are next divided into the sub-kingdoms of Protozoa 
(single-celled organisms) and Metazoa (multicelled organisms). 
The Metazoa evolved into eleven different phyla, not all of which 
are shown in the diagram, but it will be seen that the phylum of 
Chordata (animals with backbones) evolved into the classes Pisces 
(fish), Amphibia (frogs, toads, etc.), Reptilia (snakes, lizards, etc.), 
and Aves (birds). At the stage of amphibians and reptiles, life 
finally emerged from the sea and invaded the land which by this 
time was fairly liberally covered with the land-plants. This in- 
vasion of the land led to the evolution of the class of Mammalia 
which contains all the animals with warm blood and hair which 
suckle their young. Of the various orders of mammals the most 
highly developed are, of course, the primates (man, apes, etc.) 
from which during only the last million or so years the species of 
Homo sapiens has evolved. 

We must conclude this extremely brief account of evolution by 
saying that not all of nature's experiments in adaptation have 
been successful; many creatures (dinosaurs for example) de- 
veloped in such a cumbersome way that they were unequal to the 
challenge presented to them by cataclysmic changes in environ- 
ment, and they therefore became extinct. On the other hand, some 
of nature's most elementary Protozoa (such as amoeba) and 
bacteria have been so successful in their limited way that they 
have continued to survive throughout nearly the whole course of 
evolution. 

With regard to the future trend of evolution, and the vexed 
question of whether or not man is the ultimate product of nature, 
not very much need be said. This is largely a matter for specula- 
tion, although at this late stage of the evolutionary process genetic 
mutations are almost always deleterious. However, it should be 
added that, since the advent of man, evolution has acquired a 
new component. The secrets of survival are no longer confined to 
purely genetic mechanisms of transmission from generation to 
generation. With the dominance of mind, the development of 
speech, and the growth of social culture, man is able to pass on 
to his progeny verbal and written information concerning tech- 



Living Matter 99 

niques of survival. Furthermore, the relentless operation of 
natural selection is greatly restricted in a civilized society in 
which the strong care for the weak and both have equal oppor- 
tunities for reproduction. Such considerations, however, belong 
to the study of social eugenics and are not within our present 
scope. 

BIOCHEMICAL REACTIONS 

Having outlined the great diversity of forms which life has 
adopted during some 500 million to 3,000 million years of 
evolution, we may now concentrate our attention on the biochem- 
ical reactions upon which living processes depend. 

Fortunately, although there are some one-and-a-half million 
different species of plants and animals we shall find that much the 
same fundamental processes are common to all of them. For 
example, all green plants depend for their basic materials on the 
process of photosynthesis which is controlled by the compound 
chlorophyll (see page 105), while all animals with blood circula- 
tion rely on the transport of oxygen throughout their bodies by 
the related compound haemoglobin. There are also many 
examples of reactions which are identical in both plants and 
animals. For instance yeast, which is classified as a plant, is able 
to bring about the conversion of glucose into ethyl alcohol (as 
in brewing) by a series of reactions, one stage of which involves 
the formation of pyruvic acid. The reaction from glucose to 
pyruvic acid takes place in eight stages, and the same series of 
reactions, in the same eight stages, takes place in the muscle-cells 
of man. This is extremely strong evidence that yeast and man 
have a common ancestry, a fact which would be expected from 
inspection of Figure 16. We must now look more closely at the 
sort of reactions which take place within cells. 

Metabolism 

In general, the purposes of the biochemical reactions, which take 
place within a cell during its resting stage, are the conversion of 
food into suitable materials for the construction of the cell com- 
ponents and the provision of energy to sustain its functions. These 
reactions collectively constitute what is known as the cell's 



100 Introducing Science 

metabolism. Now metabolism can be divided into two types: one 
being the breaking down of food into simple molecules and free 
energy (katabolisni), and the other the synthesis, from these and 
other molecules, of the complex molecules required for the cell's 
construction or energy conservation (anabolism). 

Thus if A represents a cell-food, and F a complex molecule 
required by the cell, the generalized process of metabolism may 
be represented by the sequence of reactions: 



Of course, the number of stages will depend on the materials 
concerned, but in general some of them will be katabolic and 
some will be anabolic, 

Enzymes 

Biochemical reactions are extremely dependent upon catalysts 
(see page 68), or enzymes as they are called in biochemistry; each 
stage of a series of reactions requiring its own specific enzyme. 
Every cell contains a great number of enzymes, and their study 
is of paramount importance in biochemistry. 

While most enzymes cannot make a reaction occur that would 
not take place in their absence, they speed up reactions so that they 
can occur at the temperatures and other conditions which prevail 
within living organisms. Like inorganic catalysts, enzymes are 
not consumed during reactions, although they may form loose 
complexes with the molecules (called the substrate) they provoke 
into reaction. 

The catalytic effect of an enzyme depends on the shape and 
size of its molecule and the number and position of its 'active 
centres', for it is only when these active centres come into contact 
with the substrate molecule that catalysis occurs. For this reason 
the action of an enzyme can be easily inhibited by the combina- 
tion of one of these active centres with some other atom or 
molecule. For example, the poisonous nature of such metals as 
arsenic and mercury is due to their inhibition of enzymes vital to 
the life of cells. It should be noted, however, that not all metals are 
poisonous to enzymes; indeed the presence of some metals is 
essential to the proper function of certain enzymes. 

Another way in which the action of an enzyme can be upset 



Living Matter 101 

is called competitive inhibition ; this happens when the active centre 
of an enzyme attaches itself to a substrate which is similar to, but 
not identical with, the correct one. The action of sulphonamide 
drugs is believed to occur as a result of competitive inhibition in 
the following way. For their growth many bacteria need the com- 
pound amino-benzoic acid, and as traces of this compound are 
found in the blood of animals, these bacteria live a parasitic life 
in animal blood. When sulphonamide drugs are administered, the 
compound sulphanilamide is liberated in the blood stream, which 
is very similar in shape to amino-benzoic acid: 





NH 2 < > COOH NH 2 < > S0 2 NH 2 



amino-benzoic acid sulphanilamide 

The bacterial enzymes then form a complex with the sulphanil- 
amide molecules as substrate. The bacteria are therefore starved 
of amino-benzoic acid, and die, or cease to multiply, which is, of 
course, the purpose of the drug. 

Enzymes, the names of most of which end in the letters ft ase', 
all belong to a most important group of complex nitrogenous 
organic compounds called proteins. Although all enzymes are 
proteins, not all proteins are enzymes, and, as we shall see, other 
proteins are of vital importance in the chemistry of living matter. 
We must therefore say something about this important group of 
compounds, and return later to a discussion of enzymes and their 
connexion with inheritance. 

Proteins 

All proteins are formed from combinations of units called amino 
acids with the general formula: 

R 

CH COOH 

NH 2 

The *R* group may take many different forms; in the simplest 
amino acid of all, glycine, it consists of one hydrogen atom. If 



102 Introducing Science 

two amino acids join together with the elimination of a molecule 
of water, a peptide linkage is formed: 



Rx R 



CH COJOH +"HiNH CH - > CH NH COOH 

/\ /\ 



, * 2 CO CH 

R2 

This compound is called a dipeptide, while three amino acids 
linked together yield a trfpeptfde. The addition of more than three 
amino acids makes a polypeptide chain: 

I 1 r 

\ / CH \ A A /\ A A 

NH CO CH NH CO CH 

R 2 R4 

It is not necessary for the *R' groups to be all different from 
each other; in some chains consisting of several hundreds of 
amino acids the same groups may appear at regular intervals. 
There are, in fact, some twenty to twenty-five different amino 
acids of biochemical importance represented by these various 
'R* groups. 

Proteins are formed when these polypeptide chains link 
together, thus: 



R 




Living Matter 103 

The *R* groups incorporated in the polypeptide chains and the 
type of linkages between them will determine the nature of the 
particular protein. Some proteins are long and thin, such as hair, 
wool, and silk; while some are short and fat, such as the enzymes 
which we have been discussing. 

Proteins are obviously very complicated substances, and in 
most cases their precise structures have not been worked out, but 
in 1954 the complete structure of the hormone insulin was 
identified. 

The specificity of enzymes is related to their structure, and 
resides within the individual *R* groups contained by the 
molecule. 

THE ENERGY OF BIOCHEMICAL REACTIONS 

We have said that during cell metabolism food is converted into 
cell components or is broken down to yield its stored chemical 
energy. As metabolism proceeds in stages, it is to be expected 
that during some of these stages energy will be liberated, while 
in other stages it will remain stored in the reacting molecules. 

Thus, in the generalized example (page 100) of the conversion 
of the food fc A* into the cell component C F*, energy may be 
liberated, say, in the stages B -^ C and D -> F. This energy, 
having been detached from the metabolic sequence A ... F, is 
then either used to energize some cell function (such as motion 
or temperature control) or it is re-stored on a longer-term basis 
in a special type of molecule which we shall call (F), for use on 
some later occasion. These events are illustrated diagrammaticatty 
in Figure 17. 




104 Introducing Science 

The chemical energy of a molecule is stored in the bonds which 
hold the atoms together, so that when a reaction takes place these 
bonds will be rearranged, and consequently there will be an 
energy-change in the system (see page 131). Some bonds may be 
regarded in this way as being 'energy-rich*, that is to say they are 
bonds which will give off more energy than others when they are 
broken, and these bonds are of special importance in biochemical 
reactions. 

By far the commonest and most significant of the energy-rich 
bonds are those formed between phosphorus and certain organic 
compounds, and of these organic phosphates the most important 
is the compound adenosine triphosphate, generally known as 
ATP. Adenosine is a compound formed from the nitrogenous 
base adenine and the sugar ribose (see page 106); ATP, therefore, 
which has two energy-rich bonds, has the structure: 



NH 2 



energy-rich bonds 



CH 2 P O ~ P O P OH 




OH OH 



ribose 

When ATP loses one of its energy-rich phosphate bonds it 
becomes the diphosphate ADP - also an important compound 
which we shall meet again. 

Compounds which are formed from a base, a sugar, and a 
phosphate are called nudeotides and, as we shall see later, these 
compounds are of great significance not only in metabolic pro- 
cesses, but also in genetic inheritance. It may be said, therefore, 



Living Matter 105 

that if there is a * secret * of life it lies on the molecular level within 
the nucleotides. 

Cell Foods 

Having given a brief description of how energy is stored during 
biochemical processes we may now consider the metabolic re- 
actions which we have illustrated by the general series A -+ F 
(page 100). 

These considerations must clearly start by looking at the foods 
which are required by cells. There are, in fact, three types of 
organic compound required by cells for their sustenance: carbo- 
hydrates, fats, and proteins. Proteins we have already mentioned, 
carbohydrates and fats we shall discuss shortly, but before doing 
so we must say a few words about photosynthesis, for it is upon 
this process that plants, and therefore animals, depend for the 
manufacture of these basic foods. 

Photosynthesis 

Plants, as we have already mentioned, are able to manufacture 
their own foods from water, carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, 
and the inorganic salts (phosphates, nitrates, etc.) which they 
extract from the earth. This process, which is energized by light 
from the sun, is called photosynthesis. Animals lack this ability 
completely, and are therefore entirely dependent on plants, or 
on other animals in the case of Carnivores (meat-eaters), for their 
basic foods. 

Although the process of photosynthesis is essential for the 
continuation of all life on earth, we are still a long way from 
completely understanding it. We do know, however, that when 
sunlight falls on green plants it is absorbed within their cells by 
small particles called chloroplasts; these particles contain various 
molecules the most important of which are the chlorophylls, a 
group of green pigments to which plants largely owe their green 
colour. In some way y which is not yet understood, chlorophyll is 
able to turn the energy of sunlight into chemical energy which is 
stored in ATP molecules. These energy-rich molecules are then 
able, through a complex series of reactions each of which requires 
a specific enzyme, to activate the conversion of carbon dioxide 



106 Introducing Science 

and water into a form of sugar, glucose. The reaction can be 

written: 

6CO 2 -f 6H 2 O -> C 6 Hi 2 O 6 + 6O 2 
(glucose) 

although written in this form the equation conceals the intricacy 
of the many stages it encompasses. 

Plants are not only able to make their own sugar, they can also 
convert this sugar into starch and cellulose (all carbohydrates) 
as well as fats and proteins. In order to understand the bio- 
chemical reactions involved, it will now be necessary to say some- 
thing about carbohydrates and fats. 

Carbohydrates 

We have said that carbohydrates include sugars, starches, and 
cellulose - all these substances, as their collective name suggests, 
are water compounds (hydrates) of carbon. They all have the 
general formula Q(H 2 O) m where the letters n and m determine 
the type of carbohydrate in question. 
Carbohydrates are usually classified as follows : 

1. Monosaccharides - which are sugars. 

2. Disaccharides - also sugars. 

3. Polysaccharides - which are starches and cellulose. 
Each of these groups will now be discussed separately. 

MONOSACCHARIDES. These sugar compounds can be again 
divided into two classes : pentoses, with five carbon atoms, and 
hexoses, with six carbon atoms. Of the pentoses, only the sugar 
ribose is important, occurring, as we have seen, in ATP and ADP, 
as well as in the nucleic acids which we shall discuss on page 121 . 
Ribose has the formula C 5 H 10 O 5 , and the structure: 

H OH 

' ,O 



CHjiOH 

-. which may also 

be written: i x u 



H C OH 
H C OH 

H C 

| OH 

CH 2 OH 




Living Matter 107 

The hexoses are typified by the sugar glucose, which occurs in 
grapes and other plants, as well as in the blood of animals; bio- 
chemically it is by far the most important sugar. Its structure is 
similar to that of ribose except that it has an extra CHOH 
group; its formula is therefore CsH^Os, and its structure may 
be drawn: 



H OH 

V- 



H C OH 

OH-C H O 

1 
H C OH 

I 
H C 



CH 2 OH 

H/f V H 

I/H 
or more commonly: kf 

oS\? H I 



H OH 



CH 2 OH 



DISACCHARIDES. These compounds, as their name implies, 
are made from two Monosaccharides from which a molecule of 
water has been eliminated, and they have the general foimula 
C 12 H 2 2On. Biochemically the most important sugar in this group 
is sucrose, which occurs in cane and beet sugar; the sugar which 
we buy at the grocers is very largely this type. It has the structure: 

CH 2 OH 



CH 2 OH 




H 



OH 



Other disaccharides of importance are maltose, which consists of 
two glucose molecules, and lactose, which is found in the milk of 
mammals. 

POLYSACCHARIDES. Polysaccharides consist of chains of 
monosaccharides linked together, and they therefore have the 
general formula (C<FL w O 5 ) n . They can be classified into starches 



108 Introducing Science 

and cellulose, about each of which we must now say a few words. 
Starches occur in two main forms. The first, amylose, consists 
of a straight chain of some 200 to 500 glucose molecules : 



O 



The second form, amylopectin, is a branched-chain molecule 
containing up to 1,000 glucose molecules, each branch of which 
may contain twenty to thirty glucose groups. The branching of 
the chain occurs in this way ; 




O 



O 




Potato starch contains about 20 per cent amylose and 80 per 
cent amylopectin, but other plants have different proportions of 
the two starches. In general, plants store starch in their tubers and 
seeds, where it acts as a food reservoir from which mono- 
saccharides can be liberated when required. Animal cells store 
starch in the form of glycogen which is similar to amylopectin 
but is more highly branched. 

Cellulose consists of parallel unbranched chains of glucose 
groups, linked together with especially strong bonds, which makes 
it, chemically, extremely resistant. It is found only in plant cells, 
where it is used exclusively as a structural material and not as 
a food. 

As it is chemically very resistant, cellulose can only be broken 
down in nature in the presence of special enzymes called celluloses, 
which are produced by certain bacteria. Herbivores (grass-eating 
animals such as the horse and the cow) have colonies of such 
bacteria in their alimentary tract, and are therefore able to digest 
the cellulose of grass, making use of the sugars into which these 



Living Matter 109 

enzymes break it down. This mutually beneficial relationship 
between herbivores and bacteria is called symbiosis. 

With this brief outline of the chemistry of carbohydrates in 
mind we are now able to proceed to an examination of their 
metabolism in living organisms. 

Carbohydrate Metabolism 

Of the carbohydrates only sugar molecules are sufficiently small 
to pass through ceil walls; starch and cellulose molecules are too 
large and therefore have to be broken down outside the cell. For 
this purpose some cells are capable of secreting enzymes which 
catalyse the breakdown of polysaccharides outside the cell. Saliva 
and pancreatic secretions contain such enzymes and, as we have 
seen, certain bacteria produce enzymes which catalyse the break- 
down of cellulose. In order to enter the cell, then, carbohydrates 
have to be broken down into sugars, and as by far the most 
important sugar in this respect is glucose we shall examine the 
metabolism of this molecule within the cell. 

The oxidation of glucose into carbon dioxide, water, and energy 
can be represented by the following equation, which it will be 
noted is exactly the reverse of photosynthesis: 

C6Hi 2 O 6 + 6O 2 -^6CO 2 -h 6H 2 O + energy 

As we shall see in Chapter 8, combustion consists very largely of 
the oxidation of carbon to carbon dioxide and the oxidation of 
hydrogen to water with the release of energy; clearly therefore, 
this glucose reaction is a combustion reaction. However, in living 
matter reactions take place in stages during the course of which 
energy is temporarily stored in such energy-rich molecules as 
ATP. Furthermore, many biochemical reactions are reversible 
and the direction which they take will depend on the circumstances 
and the requirements of the cell. Therefore, while it is true to say 
that carbohydrate metabolism consists of the combustion of 
glucose, this statement is a somewhat misleading over- 
simplification. 

Chemically, glucose is a relatively inert molecule, and it is 
therefore one of the many functions of ATP to convert it into an 
active compound; this it does by giving it one of its phosphate 



1 10 Introducing Science 

bonds, changing in the process from ATP to ADP. The formation 
of glucose phosphate in this way is catalysed by the enzyme 
hexokinase : 

CH 2 OH 

hexokinase 




ATP 




glucose glucose phosphate 

Although glucose can diffuse through a cell wall, glucose phos- 
phate cannot do so, and thus, in a sense, ATP can be said to draw 
glucose into the cell, as well as activating it for further reaction. 

Once this reactive glucose phosphate has been formed within 
the cell, one of two things may happen to it : either it can be built 
up into a polysaccharide to act as a food reservoir for the future 
(and the manufacture of cellulose in the case of plants), or it can 
be broken down further with the subsequent liberation of energy. 

Looking first at the build-up to polysaccharides, it has been 
shown that the conversion of glucose phosphate into starch takes 
place in two reversible stages. In plant cells the enzymes present 
direct the reaction so that amylose and amylopectin are formed, 
while in animal cells slightly different enzymes produce glycogen. 
Animal cells store this water-insoluble glycogen, so that if their 
supply of glucose is cut off for any reason, they have a reservoir 
of food in the form of starch. Thus, in the absence of glucose, the 
glucose phosphate-starch reaction goes into reverse, so that 
starch is broken down into glucose phosphate. 

Bearing in mind the manufacture of glucose from carbon di- 
oxide during photosynthesis, the metabolic processes may be 
represented as in Figure 18a. 

We now have to consider how glucose phosphate is broken 
down with the evolution of energy. In both plant and animal cells 
this process can take place in one of two ways, that is either in 
the presence of oxygen (called an aerobic process) or partly in the 
absence of oxygen (called an anaerobic process). 

In the aerobic process, glucose phosphate is broken down, 



Living Matter 



111 




GLUCOSE PHOSPHATE 




Fig. 18a 

with the further assistance of ATP and various enzymes, in a 
series of complex reactions which we need not describe, into 
carbon dioxide and energy. In the anaerobic process, with the 
help of ADP, after seven stages the compound pyruvic acid 
(CH 3 CO . COOH) is formed : 

Glucose-Phosphate + 2ADP -> 2 Pyruvic Acid 4- 2ATP 

In this way, it will be seen that the breakdown of glucose in the 
absence of oxygen yields pyruvic acid and two energy-rich ATP 
molecules - a process called anaerobic glycolysis. This process is 
most important to animals in circumstances in which they need 
more oxygen than their blood can supply (e.g., a sudden energy 
requirement such as a jump), for anaerobic glycolysis can provide 
energy in the form of ATP. 

We have already mentioned that the pathway from glucose to 
pyruvic acid is exactly the same in animal cells as it is in fermenta- 
tion by yeast. However, yeast contains two additional enzymes^ 
not present in animal cells, which convert the pyruvic acid first 
into acetaldehyde and then into ethyl alcohol, thus: 

H 2 

CH^CO-COOH -> CO 2 + CH 3 CHO -* CH 3 CH 2 OH + CO 2 
Pyruvic acid Acetaldehyde Ethyl alcohol 



112 Introducing Science 

In animal cells, however, lactic acid is formed from pyruvic acid 
in anaerobic conditions - an important reaction in animal muscle 
cells. In the presence of oxygen, pyruvic acid does not form lactic 
acid but is decomposed within the cell by a complicated series of 
reactions called the citric-acid cycle. As we shall see later, this 
series of reactions is also used in the final breakdown of fats and 
proteins, and is therefore a most important clearing-house of 
metabolic intermediates. As the details of this cycle are rather 
complex we need not go into them here, but we may now com- 
plete our diagram outlining the metabolism of carbohydrates in 
Figure 18b. 

Finally, we must mention that the anaerobic conversion of 
glucose phosphate to pyruvic acid is reversible provided that the 
appropriate enzymes are present, so in this way glucose (and 
starch) can be made within the cell from pyruvic acid if the 
external source of glucose is reduced. In the case of plants this 



GLUCOSE 



PHOTOSYNTHESIS 



ATP 



GLUCOSE PHOSPHATE 



t i 

anaerobic 




PYRUVIC ACID 


' 


\. 





C0z+ ENERGY * 




Fig. 18b 



Living Matter 113 

reaction is not important, of course, because they can make their 
own glucose by photosynthesis, and seeds can draw on their 
reservoir of starch. 

After this brief survey of carbohydrate metabolism, we may 
now pass to the fats and their metabolism. 

The Lipids 

We have said that one of the three basic foods required by living 
organisms is fats. Fats, however, form part of a larger group of 
organic compounds known as lipids 9 which may be classified as : 

1 . Simple lipids - fats and waxes. 

2. Compound lipids - phospholipids and glycolipids. 

3. Steroids. 

SIMPLE LIPIDS. Fats are simple lipids formed by the combina- 
tion of glycerol and fatty acids. Glycerol, it will be remembered, 
has the structure fsee page 75): 

CH 2 OH 
CH.OH 
CH 2 OH 
and fats, therefore, have the general formula: 

CH 2 OOC.Ri 

CHOOC.R 2 

CH 2 OOC.R 3 

Natural fats are mixtures of such compounds in which the *R* 
groups represent fatty acids with from four to thirty carbon atoms,, 
but by far the commonest are esters of palmitic acid: 

Ci 5 H 3 i.COOH 
stearic acid 

Ci 7 H 3 5.COOH 
and oleic acid 

Ci 7 H 33 .COOH 

Nearly all the fatty acids which occur in nature have even 
numbers of carbon atoms and, of the three acids mentioned; 



114 Introducing Science 

above, only one, oleic acid, is unsaturated (i.e., contains a double 
bond, see page 73). In general the more unsaturated acid a fat 
contains, the lower is its melting-point - for example olive oil is 
nearly all oleic acid and is therefore a liquid at normal tempera- 
tures. (An oil is simply a liquid fat, and waxes, which do not 
concern us here, are combinations of fatty acids with alcohols 
other than glyceroL) 

COMPOUND LIPIDS. The Phospholipids are compounds made 
from glycerol, fatty acids, a phosphate, and a nitrogenous base: 

CHzOOC.Ri 
CH.OOC.R O 
CH 2 O P O BASE 

OH 

These compounds are required by cells in the construction of their 
membranes; they also occur in blood plasma and in the yolk of 
eggs. The glycolipids are also very complex substances, but not 
very much is known about their function in living organisms. 

STEROIDS. These compounds are involved in a variety of 
processes, such as the calcification of teeth and bone, the distribu- 
tion of hair, etc., but many of their activities are not properly 
understood. A typical example of this group is cholesterol, which 
occurs in animals; its excessive production in man has been 
suspected of being a contributory cause of coronary thrombosis. 

These remarkable compounds are all based on the following 
structure, to which a variety of side groups can be attached: 

CH* CHa 
CH 2 CH CH 2 



CH 2 CH CH CH 2 

/ \ / \ / 

CHa CH CH usually abbreviated to; 



CH 2 CH CHa 

< / \ / 

CH 2 CH 2 




Living Matter 115 

Lipid Metabolism 

Fat is the most compact form in which food is stored in the body, 
and it is worth noting that its complete oxidation yields twice as 
much water as can be obtained from either carbohydrate or 
protein. The breakdown of fats by cells starts by hydrolysis into 
glycerol and fatty acids in the presence of enzymes called Upases : 

CH^OOC.R CH 2 OH 

} *" LIPASES | 

CH.OOC.R + 3H 2 < > CH.OH + 3R.COOH 

CHzOOC.R CH 2 OH 

glycerol fatty acid 

This is a reversible reaction, the direction of which will depend 
on conditions in the cell. 

The glycerol so formed is converted into glucose, with the help 
of ATP, via the intermediate stage of glycero-phosphate. The 
fatty acids, again with the help of ATP, are broken down through 
a variety of stages, the last of which form part of the citric-acid 
cycle, into carbon dioxide and energy. 

In Figure 18c the metabolism of fats is added to our diagram, 
illustrating the metabolism of carbohydrates. 

The breakdown of fatty acids through the citric-acid cycle can 
be made reversible in certain circumstances, although the reverse 
reactions proceed by slightly different steps which are not shown 
in the diagram. It will be seen, therefore, that fats and carbo- 
hydrates are interconvertible within cells, but for reasons which 
are not yet clear most cells prefer carbohydrates to any other 
type of food. To complete our brief survey of cell metabolism we 
must now look at the way in which proteins are broken down. 

Protein Metabolism 

We have already outlined the general structure of proteins (see 
page 101), and seen that they consist of very large molecules ; they 
cannot therefore be expected to diffuse through cell walls and 
have to be broken down outside the cell into their constituent 
amino acids. This process is catalysed by enzymes called 
proteinases and peptidases. For example, in man the stomach. 



116 



Introducing Science 





t/J 

H 


^_ 


FATTY ACIDS 














, ^ 








w 






CELLULOSE 
(plants only) 




STARCH 


cT 










V 


PYRUVIC ACID 


A 


** 




GLUCOSE PHOSPHATE 


< . 


H 
f 








^s! 


\ t 


-g 


GLUCOSE 


>< 






i 






O 
w 

8^ 




sisanxNAsoioHd 









Living Matter 117 

contains a typical peptidase called pepsin and the duodenum 
another called trypsin, which break down proteins into their 
arnino acids, just as polysaccharides are broken down into their 
constituent monosaccharides. 

Such enzymes as these are, of course, secreted by specialized 
cells in the body, but similar enzymes also occur within cells 
because cellular proteins are continuously being synthesized and 
broken down as part of the normal process of cell metabolism. 
One of two things, therefore, may happen to an amino acid which 
enters a cell : either it will be decomposed or it will be used in the 
synthesis of some other protein. 

Looking first at the breakdown of amino acids, and without 
going into detail, we may say that they are either broken down 
into pyruvic acid or into one of the constituents of the citric-acid 
cycle. With some amino acids, ammonia is formed; as this is toxic 
to most cells, it is converted into urea by a series of reactions 
which may be summed up thus: 



CO 2 + 2NH 3 

ammonia urea 

In the higher animals, of course, urea is disposed of by the body 
in the urine. 

As regards the synthesis of particular amino acids in the cell, 
different forms of life have different requirements. For example, 
there are eight amino acids which man cannot make for himself 
in his body-cells, and these so-called 'essential amino acids' have 
to be supplied in his food. Otter amino acids, however, can be 
synthesized by various processes, which use pyruvic acid, or one 
of the constituents of the citric-acid cycle, as a starting-point. 

The order in which these amino acids join together in the cell 
to form proteins is still something of a mystery, but we shall 
return to this point later. In the meantime we may add protein 
metabolism to complete our general metabolic diagram (see 
Figure 18d). 




1 1 8 Introducing Science 

This diagram which we have built up is, of course, a gross 
over-simplification of the great number of reactions which do, or 
can, take place within cells, but it shows the general outline of 
such processes and the way in which the citric-acid cycle acts as a 
clearing-house of intermediates for the interconversion of carbo- 
hydrates, fats, and proteins. 

Finally, on the subject of metabolism, it should be said that 
many of the enzymes of the citric-acid cycle, as well as those 
which attack fatty acids, are contained in the mitochondria 
whose presence in the cytoplasm of cells we noted on page 90. 

Metabolic Control 

The very sketchy outline we have given of cell metabolism does 
not tell us how a man, or even an amoeba, works, for we have 
not said anything about the way in which these metabolic pro- 
cesses are controlled. Indeed, this is a subject about which not 
very much is known, particularly in multicellular organisms. 

In single-celled organisms it appears that control results from 
a 'feedback' principle depending on the relative concentrations 
of the various foods and intermediates which exist in the cell. If, 
for instance, the concentration of glucose falls, this information is 
fed back to the starch reservoir which breaks down to the extent 
required to bring the concentration of glucose back to normal. 
Similarly, if oxygen is in short supply, and energy cannot be 
obtained by oxidation, molecules such as ATP liberate their 
stored energy. The citric-acid cycle appears to play an important 
part in these mechanisms, being very sensitive to the concentra- 
tion of each of its constituents. 

In multicellular organisms, and in the higher animals in particu- 
lar, this question of the control of metabolism is, of course, very 
much more complex and elaborate. Co-ordination of body func- 
tions is brought about by a group of 'chemical messengers' called 
hormones, which are produced by special glands and which 
circulate in the blood-stream. These hormones are either proteins, 
steroids, or in some cases quite simple molecules. However, the 
biochemistry of their functions is not fully understood and is a 
subject of contemporary research. 



Living Matter 



119 



ca 
H 

&4 




fatty acids 
















b 



120 Introducing Science 

GENETIC INHERITANCE 

Having outlined the processes by which cells maintain themselves 
we must now look, once again, at the mechanism by which they 
reproduce themselves. 

We have said that, on the biological level, the factors which 
control reproduction are the chromosomes and genes in the cell 
nuclei; it is therefore these entities which we must now examine 
from the point of view of biochemistry. 

Returning to our generalized metabolic process : 

A-^B-^C-^D->E-^F 

it will be recalled that we said that each step is catalysed by a 
specific enzyme. Now it has been shown that, by exposing certain 
organisms to X-radiation, genetic mutations can occur which 
destroy the ability of that organism's progeny to carry out a 
particular step in a chain of metabolic reactions. For example, as 
a result of such a mutation a strain of organisms might arise 
which lacks the ability to make compound E from compound D. 
This state of affairs would become apparent from the unusually 
high concentration of D in the cells of the organism, and the fact 
that they are only able to manufacture F if they are supplied with 
E in their diet. 

These experiments clearly point to the hypothesis that the 
genetic instructions which are passed from generation to genera- 
tion are concerned with the inheritance of an ability to make the 
right enzyme for the right purpose. In fact the current theory is 
that for each enzyme which occurs in, or is made by, a cell, there 
is a corresponding gene. Thus the child who inherits from his 
parents a mop of red hair has been born with a gene which pro- 
duces an enzyme whose specific function is catalysing the 
synthesis of a red dye in the cells which produce hair. 

Nucleic Acids 

While it must be admitted that the exact mechanism of genetic 
inheritance by way of enzymes has not yet been fully worked out, 
it has been known for some time that chromosomes consist of 
thread-like molecules of a substance called deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA for short), which has the structure: 



Living Matter 121 

base base base 

I 1 I 

sugar sugar sugar 

S~\ ^/"V j"v >^ (~. ^^/"V 



P=O 

1 1 I 

OH OH OH 

As we saw when discussing ATP, compounds made up from a 
base, a sugar, and a phosphate are called nucleotides, and there- 
fore DNA molecules are polynucleotide^^ differing from each 
other in the types of bases which they incorporate. The sugar is in 
all cases a derivative of ribose called deoxyribose; but there are 
four different types of bases which occur in these chains, and it is 
the order of the arrangement of these bases which constitutes 
some sort of code on the basis of which specific enzyme proteins 
are synthesized. 

It has further been ascertained that chromosomes actually 
consist of two identical polynucleotide chains linked together by 
special bonds between the bases. These two chains are wound 
together into a helical spring-shaped structure, and the tightness 
of the winding of the spring is one of the factors controlling which 
bases are able to fit together in the confined space thus created. 
The two polynucleotide chains are the chromatids which we 
mentioned on page 90, and as we said then, during reproduction 
they separate so that the newly formed cell has an exact replica 
of the genetic code contained by its parent. In the new cell the 
single-stranded DNA chain builds up another replica of itself (in 
the absence of mutations) so that it will, in turn, be able to pass 
this code on to its progeny. 

We now have to examine the manner in which this coded in- 
formation of the DNA chain in the nucleus is passed on to the 
cytoplasm, where the synthesis of the protein molecules takes 
place in the units called ribosomes. Here again, this is a process 
which is still very much a subject of contemporary research, but 
it is now generally accepted that the DNA of the nucleus passes 
its information to the cytoplasm by way of a messenger nucleic 
acid which differs from DNA in its sugar and is called ribonucleic 



122 Introducing Science 

acid (RNA). These RNA molecules are single-stranded poly- 
nucleotide chains which also carry their information by way of 
the sequence of their bases and again four different bases are 
involved, three of which are identical to those of DNA. Thus 
the RNA polynucleotides act as a 'template' for arranging the 
sequence of the various amino acids in the ribosomes, giving the 
enzymes their specificity. 

The manner in which the order of the four types of base in the 
nucleic acid organize the order of the twenty or so amino acids 
in the protein is only now beginning to be understood. It is 
suggested that each, amino acid is represented by the sequence of 
three of the four bases. Thus if the four bases are say, A, B, c and 
D, one amino acid might be represented by the arrangement 
ABC, another by BDC, and so on. Work on this decoding is still 
in its very early stages, but it is hoped that it will not be long 
before the genetic code has been cracked. 

It will be observed that, according to this modern theory, the 
genes, which used to be thought of as separate particles attached 
to the chromosomes, are no more than a characteristic arrange- 
ment of part of the chromosome molecule. This reduction of the 
'secrets of life' to a molecular arrangement is taken a step farther 
in the current views concerning viruses, about which we must 
now say a few words. 

VIRUSES 

It has been known since the end of the last century that certain 
diseases of plants and animals are caused by particles consider- 
ably smaller than bacteria, which are only capable of existence 
and replication inside living cells - these particles are called 
viruses. Viruses are so small (some are only about a millionth of a 
centimetre in length) that they only became observable after the 
invention of the electron microscope (see page 178) and their 
classification has therefore been related to the diseases they cause 
(e.g., Polio Virus, Tobacco Leaf Mosaic Virus, etc.) rather than 
to their shape as in the case of bacteria. 

Whether or not viruses can be classed as living things is a 
anatter of controversy - they do indeed exhibit many of the 
characteristics which we have mentioned, but as they are not 



Living Matter 123 

cellular in construction and as they require a living cell as a host, 
it is probably safer to regard them as a sort of 'half-way house* 
between the animate and the inanimate (see page 230). The 
interesting thing about them is that they have been found to 
consist of either RN A or DNA molecules encased within a pro- 
tein, but their infective potency appears to reside entirely with 
the nucleic acid, for the protein coating may be shed when the 
virus enters a cell. Once inside a cell a virus is able to replicate 
itself many times over, and in doing so it destroys its host. It 
therefore seems that the nucleic acid of the virus in some way 
usurps the function of the nucleic acid of the cell, thereby dis- 
rupting the cellular processes of metabolism and reproduction. 

Viruses are very specific about the cells in which they will 
thrive; only one particular type of cell can serve as a host for a 
particular type of virus, and it has recently been found that a 
relationship exists between the order of the bases in the nucleic 
acid of the virus and that of its host-cell. It appears that the 
base order of a virus RNA or DNA is exactly the reverse of that 
of its host's nucleic acids, and it is this fact which may account 
for the inability of the cell's enzymes to attack the virus, 

In conclusion, it is worth noting that certain enzymes have 
been isolated which catalyse the linking together of individual 
nucleotides to form RNA or DNA molecules. These reactions 
can be made to proceed in a test-tube, but the synthetic nucleic 
acids so created have a random order of bases; so although they 
may be said to be viruses, no such synthetic virus has yet been 
created which has the ability to replicate itself in any known cell. 

These fascinating experiments are on the very brink of life, and 
there is little doubt that the intense research that is at present 
being carried out into the behaviour and constitution of nucleic 
acids will lead to a new and more profound understanding of the 
meaning of life in material terms. 



PART THREE 

ENERGY 



CHAPTER 7 

THE CONCEPTION OF ENERGY 



IN the first two parts of this book it has been fairly easy to 
describe the matter of the universe in terms that can be pictured 
with reference to our everyday experiences. In doing so, however, 
it has been necessary to simplify the construction of an atom so 
that we could visualize it as a miniature solar system consisting 
of tiny, but solid, particles. 

Now that we come to examine the conception of energy more 
closely it will not always be so easy to depict our ideas with such 
graphic simplicity, and to some extent our model of the atom 
will have to be modified by certain considerations which defy 
visualization. During this part of the book we shall have to accept 
the fact that electrons, which we have hitherto referred to only as 
particles, behave also in a manner associated with waves of 
energy. 

By way of consolation it may be said that this difficulty of 
visualization is not a new experience for mankind. Perhaps our 
descendants will be as amused at our obtuse grapplings with the 
idea of particles that behave like waves, as we are at our ancestors 
for their reluctance to visualize a spherical earth which revolved 
around the sun. 

In describing matter, we referred to its discontinuous nature, 
and compared it to the continuous quantity - time. From our 
everyday experiences energy, too, appears to be a continuous 
quantity, but we shall see when we come to deal with radiant 
energy, that energy is in fact discontinuous; that is, it increases 
or decreases by small amounts which have a definite minimum 
size. The minimum quantity of energy that can exist under given 
conditions is called a quantum, and the theory explaining the dis- 
continuous nature of energy is known as the Quantum Theory. 

As these energy quanta are extremely small, it is not necessary 
to take them into account individually when dealing with the 
energy associated with large quantities of matter. For example, 



128 Introducing Science 

a spinning top contains a relatively large quantity of matter 
(compared to an atom) and therefore the energy required to make 
it spin is very large indeed compared to an energy quantum. Thus, 
although it is true to say that any increase or decrease in the rate 
of spin of a top is quantized (i.e., increases or decreases by small 
jumps), the jumps are so tiny that for all practical purposes the 
discontinuity can be ignored. 

Only v/hen we consider the energy associated with individual 
atoms or molecules shall we need to consider the Quantum 
Theory. A gas molecule, for example, has only a tiny mass, there- 
fore the amount of energy required to make it spin like a top is 
very small - in fact, about the amount contained by an energy- 
quantum. For this reason such a molecule can only spin at certain 
fixed speeds, any increase or decrease being made in definite 
jumps; there are therefore certain speeds at which the molecule 
cannot spin. These considerations will be examined more 
thoroughly in later chapters. 



FORMS OF ENERGY 

At this stage we can say that matter is associated with energy in 
two distinct forms, that is, energy of motion, called kinetic energy, 
and stored energy, called potential energy. Each of these two 
forms of energy contribute to the mass which is the characteristic 
property of matter. In the case of an electron, part of the mass 
results from its electric charge (this is the potential energy) and 
part is contributed by the kinetic energy due to its movement. 
The greater the speed of movement, the greater the kinetic 
energy, and consequently the greater the mass (see page 198). In 
fact an electron moving at 99 per cent of the velocity of light is 
seven times heavier than an electron at rest. This very great 
increase of mass with velocity is not an everyday experience 
because, except at speeds approaching that of light, the increase 
in mass is so small that it can be ignored. Such speeds, however, 
are quite common with sub-atomic particles, and in the particle 
accelerators used in experimental atomic physics this increase of 
mass with velocity has to be taken into account. 



The Conception of Energy 



129 




CHEMICAL 
ENERGY 



electric cells electrolysis 



ELECTRICAL 
ENERGY 



generators 




endothermic exothermic 
reactions reactions 



combustion 



X-rays 
wireless 



HEAT 
ENERGY 



hot body 
radiation 



RADIANT 
ENERGY 



bombardment 
of the elements 



atomic 
piles 



radioactivity 



electrical 
motors 



ATOMIC 
ENERGY 



heat 
engines 



friction 





MECHANICAL 
ENERGY 


^ 



Fig. 19 



130 Introducing Science 

Energy Transformations 

For practical purposes it is not always convenient to categorize 

all energy into the two fundamental forms, potential and kinetic; 

it is simpler to distinguish between the six forms in which energy 

is useful to us: chemical, heat, mechanical, electrical, radiant, and 

atomic energy. 

These six forms of energy can be transformed into one another 
by a variety of processes, but each such transformation can only 
occur in the presence of matter. Energy can exist in the absence 
of matter, that is in empty space, but only in the form of radiant 
energy. 

The ultimate source of the energy of the universe is a subject 
for speculation (see page 224); it is possible, indeed, that it is 
being continuously created by a power beyond the scope of our 
understanding. As a working hypothesis, however, we must 
assume that energy cannot be created without the destruction of 
matter, and that energy cannot be destroyed without the creation 
of matter. This statement is a combination of the Laws of the 
Conservation of Mass and Energy to which we shall refer again. 

Figure 19 shows the way in which the six forms of energy 
mentioned above can be transformed into each other. In the 
following chapters we discuss more fully these six energy forms 
and their interconversions. 



CHAPTER 8 

CHEMICAL ENERGY, HEAT, AND 
MECHANICAL ENERGY 



WE have seen that all matter is composed of atoms or molecules 
which are in a state of continual movement. These movements 
include translation of the molecule or atom through space (in 
gases and liquids only), vibration of the atoms about fixed posi- 
tions within the molecule, and, in the case of gases only, rotation 
of the whole molecule. A typical diatomic gas molecule would be 
subject to the motions shown in Figure 20. 



^ 



translation of the whole 
j \ molecule through space 
molecular rotation 1 \ 



\ vibration of the atoms 
about fixed positions 

Fig. 20 

These complex motions represent kinetic energy stored within 
matter (except that the energy of vibration becomes potential 
energy when the atoms come to rest at the ends of their vibratory 
movements); potential energy is also stored in the molecules as 
electrical forces holding the molecule together, and in the form 
of electronic excitation (see page 189). The total of the kinetic 
and potential energy so stored within the molecules of matter is 
called for convenience chemical energy. It must be noted that this 
energy is in addition to the atomic or nuclear energy which is 
stored within the nucleus of the atom (see page 203). 

CHEMICAL ENERGY 

As chemical reactions occur when moving molecules collide with 
each other under appropriate conditions, and as these reactions 



132 Introducing Science 

alter the composition and configuration of the molecules, it is not 
surprising that all chemical reactions are accompanied by a 
change in the energy-content of the reacting system. This change 
of energy-content is due to the redistribution of the chemical 
energy only - the atomic energy remains totally unchanged by 
chemical reactions. 

Exothermic and Endothermic Reactions 

If the redistribution of energy during a chemical reaction is such 
that the energy of the reacting atoms or molecules is greater than 
that of the products, then the excess of energy is given off as heat 
energy or radiant energy, and the reaction is said to be exothermic. 
On the other hand, if heat energy has to be supplied to the 
reacting system by the surroundings, the reaction is called 
endothermic. In order to specify a chemical reaction completely, 
therefore, it is necessary to add to the equations which we have 
used to describe the quantities of the reacting matter, a term 
relating to the energy (heat) input or output. A complete equation 
of reaction is typified by the exothermic reaction: 

2H 2 -f 62 = 2H 2 O + 3,200 calories per gram 
or in the case of an endothermic reaction: 

2C + Ha = C 2 H2 - 2,100 calories per gram 

From these examples it will be seen that the formation of one 
gram of water is accompanied by the evolution of 3,200 calories 
of heat energy, while the formation of one gram of acetylene 
(C 2 H2) requires the addition of 2,100 calories of heat from the 
surroundings. 

We have already explained that energy can only be created by 
a system at the expense of the quantity of matter which it contains. 
It is therefore to be expected that when hydrogen and oxygen 
combine to form water with the evolution of heat energy, the 
mass of water formed will be less than the combined mass of the 
reactants (oxygen and hydrogen). This is in fact the case, but, as 
we have already pointed out, a very great deal of energy is 
required to make even a tiny quantity of matter. In the above 
example, the amount of matter that is lost in order to create 
3,200 calories of heat is less than one thousand millionth part of 



Chemical Energy, Heat, and Mechanical Energy 133 

a gram of water. Such a quantity of matter is immeasurably small, 
so we may say, to a very close approximation, that the mass of a 
reacting system remains constant if chemical energy only is in- 
volved. (This is the Law of Conservation of Mass referred to on 
page 130.) However, if atomic energy is liberated this approxi- 
mation does not hold as the mass associated with the energy 
liberated by the disintegration of an atomic nucleus is of the same 
order of magnitude as the mass of the atom itself (see Chapter 11). 

The Calorie 

In the foregoing examples we have used the unit of heat energy 
called a calorie^ which must now be explained. A calorie is simply 
the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one gram 
of water by one degree Centigrade. This is quite a small quantity 
of heat - the average domestic kettle holds about 1,000 grams of 
water, therefore t0 raise it to boiling-point (i.e., to increase its 
temperature by, say, 85C, from 15C to 100C) requires 85 x 
1,000=85,000 calories. (This calculation ignores the heat 
required to raise the temperature of the container and the heat 
that is lost to the surroundings.) The Calories used for calculating 
our food intake are a thousand times larger and are spelt with a 
capital *C* to distinguish them. 

HEAT ENERGY 

We have seen how chemical energy is converted into heat energy 
by an exothermic chemical reaction, and conversely how heat 
energy goes to make up the chemical energy in an endothermic 
reaction. In order to explain what this heat energy is it will be 
necessary to distinguish between heat and temperature. 

In discussing the physical states of matter we saw that 
temperature was a measure of the kinetic energy of the moving 
atoms or molecules comprising matter. Thus, a very small 
quantity of matter can have a very high temperature. On the 
other hand, the heat energy possessed by a body is related to its 
temperature and to the number and kind of atoms or molecules 
of which it is constructed. That is to say, the heat contained by a 
body depends not only on its temperature but also on its mass. 



134 Introducing Science 

Therefore a very heavy body can be at a low temperature but 
still contain a large amount of heat. 

An incandescent speck of hot metal from a grindstone does not 
burn our skin although it has a high temperature, because it has 
too little mass to contain much heat. In contrast, St Thomas's 
Hospital, London, is heated by the water of the River Thames. 
Owing to the hot effluents from factories that are pumped into the 
river along its course, the temperature of the water in London 
is very slightly above that of the surroundings : as millions of tons 
of water flow through London daily, plenty of 'low temperature' 
heat is available. A machine called a 'heat pump' is used to raise 
the temperature of this heat so that it can be usefully employed 
to warm the hospital. 

In making this point about a heat pump, it must be stressed 
that in order to be able to extract useful energy from a source of 
heat, it must be at a higher temperature than its surroundings. 
It is not possible, for example, to use the heat of the ocean to 
drive a ship, because the sea would never be at a higher tempera- 
ture than the ship. This fact, that heat will never flow from one 
source to another at a higher temperature (without the applica- 
tion of energy from an outside source) is the basis of an important 
law called the Second Law of Thermodynamics. 

The Laws of Tliermodynamics 

At this point it may be appropriate to say a word about thermo- 
dynamics, which, as its name implies, is the study of the flow of 
heat or energy. This science is based on three fundamental laws, 
which, being statistical in nature, can only be applied to large 
numbers of atoms or molecules - we have already seen that 
statistical laws do not apply to individuals. 

The First Law of Thermodynamics states that energy can be 
neither created nor destroyed, and is also known as the Law of 
Conservation of Energy. This law, and the Law of Conservation 
of Mass (see page 133) have been combined into Einstein's Law 
of the Equivalence of Mass and Energy (see page 198). We must 
now say, therefore, that the First Law of Thermodynamics applies 
only to systems of constant mass. The Second Law of Thermo- 
dynamics, which we have mentioned in the last paragraph, we 



Chemical Energy, Heat, and Mechanical Energy 135 

shall refer to again on page 137 when we discuss entropy; at the 
same time we shall refer to the Third Law. 

Combustion 

If a reaction is strongly exothermic and proceeds very rapidly, 
the process is called combustion. Nearly all combustion reactions 
are oxidation reactions (see page 51) in which the oxygen is 
supplied by the atmosphere. 

Most of the energy required by our civilization is derived from 
the heat energy obtained by the combustion of the fossil fuels 
(coal, oil, and natural gas). As the chemical energy of these 
fuels is stored in molecules consisting mostly of carbon and 
hydrogen, the two most important combustion reactions are the 
oxidation of carbon to carbon dioxide: 

C -f O 2 = CO 2 -f 2,100 calories per gram 
and the familiar oxidation of hydrogen to water: 

2H 2 + O 2 = 2H 2 O -f 3,200 calories per gram 

Other reactions occur, as there are other elements present to a 
small extent in the fossil fuels, but these two are by far the most 
important in calculating the total heat energy which will be 
evolved when coal or oil are burned. 

The nitrogen in the air (air is three-quarters nitrogen) takes no 
part in the combustion process, and is therefore present in the 
products of combustion together with water (as steam) and carbon 
dioxide. Its presence has the effect of reducing the temperature 
and the available energy of a combustion reaction, so that if pure 
oxygen is used instead of air much higher temperatures result. 

MECHANICAL ENERGY 

In Figure 19 on page 129 showing the energy conversions that 
take place in the presence of matter, we saw that heat energy is 
converted into mechanical energy by a heat engine (for example 
a steam, petrol, or Diesel piston engine, or a steam or gas turbine). 
Conversely, the mechanical movement of one piece of matter on, 
or through, another causes friction which results in some part of 
the mechanical energy being converted into heat. 



136 Introducing Science 

If we think again of matter as being composed of rapidly 
moving atoms or molecules, we can appreciate that the con- 
version of heat energy into mechanical energy, for example in the 
cylinder of a piston engine, comes about as a result of the random 
motions of the gas molecules imparting to the atoms of the metal 
piston an overall uniform motion in one direction. The piston, 
being a solid free to move in one direction only, acquires its 
kinetic energy as a result of the impact of those gas molecules 
which collide with it. Thus the conversion of heat into mechanical 
energy is a way of organizing and making use of the random 
kinetic energy of moving molecules. It should be made clear that 
mechanical energy is a form of kinetic energy, but it is kinetic 
energy which is directed to some mechanical purpose. 

In the case of friction, the opposite is the case. For example, 
some of the organized mechanical energy of a rotating shaft goes 
to increase the disorganized vibrations of the metal atoms of the 
bearing through which it runs; this increased vibrational energy 
of the metal atoms means that its temperature is raised and the 
bearing therefore becomes heated as a result of the friction. 

Entropy 

This loss of energy through friction is only one example of a 
more general phenomenon. It is an observed fact (though not a 
theoretical one) that throughout the universe energy tends to be 
dissipated in such a way that the total available energy becomes 
more disorganized and more difficult to trap and use. 

One only has to think of driving down the road in a car. The 
chemical energy stored in the petrol is converted into heat by 
combustion and then into mechanical energy in the engine. The 
organized mechanical energy so produced results in the controlled 
and organized motion of the car. But some of that energy has 
been irrevocably dissipated in heating the road as a result of the 
friction of the tyres, heating the air with the exhaust gases, and 
by overcoming wind resistance. This energy is lost to us for good. 

The extent to which energy is in a state of disorganization is 
measured by a quantity called entropy. The higher the state of 
disorganization the higher the entropy - the lower the extent of 
disorganization the lower the entropy. In fact, as the Third Law 



Chemical Energy , Heat, and Mechanical Energy 137 

of Thermodynamics states, at the Absolute Zero of Temperature 
(see page 47) when all atomic vibration and motion stops, the 
entropy is zero, because there is no disorganized motion. 

In the preceding paragraphs we have said that it is an observed 
fact that the total energy of the universe tends to become more 
disorganized, and consequently we may say that the entropy of the 
universe is always increasing. This is another way of expressing the 
Second Law of Thermodynamics which, it will be remembered, 
states that heat will not flow from a cold to a hot body without 
the application of external energy (see page 134). 

Thus, should the universe finally unwind itself completely, so 
that every part of it is at the same temperature, there would be 
no energy available for use. This would be the ultimate state of 
the disorganization of energy, because all molecular and atomic 
motions would be at random, and, in accordance with the Second 
Law of Thermodynamics, they would be unable to impart a 
uniform motion to other atoms of matter. Were this to happen the 
entropy of the universe would be at its maximum. 

This condition, which is referred to as the *Heat Death of the 
Universe*, has been of great interest to philosophers as well as 
scientists. For if the universe can in fact be regarded as a closed 
system subject to the Second Law of Thermodynamics (which is 
by no means certain), it not only follows that it will have a finite 
end, but also that it had a finite beginning; for if it had been 
created an infinite time ago it would by now have inevitably 
suffered its heat death. We shall refer to the creation of the 
universe again in greater detail in Chapter 12. 

Efficiency of Mechanical Systems 

The inevitable wastage of available energy due to friction, loss of 
heat to the surroundings, etc., when heat is converted into 
mechanical energy, has given engineers cause to express the 
proportion of energy that is available for useful work as the 
efficiency of the system. The efficiency is defined simply as 
the percentage of 'possible energy' that can be extracted as 'useful 
energy* from a system. For example, the efficiency of a petrol 
engine is about 20 per cent, that is to say, for every gallon of 
petrol burnt in the engine which contains a possible heat energy 



138 Introducing Science 

of about 30 million calories, only 6 million calories are available 
for driving the car. Of the remaining 80 per cent, about three- 
eighths are carried away by the cooling water and five-eighths 
lost as heat from the exhaust gases and friction in the bearings. 

By comparison with these figures, when electrical energy is 
converted into mechanical energy in an electric motor the 
efficiency is far greater, and for really big machines can be as 
high as 95 per cent. 



CHAPTER 9 

ELECTRICAL ENERGY 



IN the previous chapter reactions were described in which 
chemical energy was converted into heat energy. In certain re- 
actions, now to be outlined, chemical energy can be converted 
directly into electrical energy. 

THE ELECTRIC CELL 

As will be seen in Figure 21, such reactions take place in a so- 
called electric cell, the simplest form of which is made by dipping 
a rod of zinc (Zn) and a rod of copper (Cu) into a solution of 
sulphuric acid (H 2 SO 4 ) in water. 

The zinc dissolves in the acid forming zinc ions, sulphate 
ions, and hydrogen ions; so, using the symbols given on page 49 
and V to depict an electron, the equation of reaction may be 
written thus : 

2Zn + H 2 S0 4 ~>2Zn+ + SO/ + 2H+ + 2e 

For every two zinc ions that go into solution, two electrons are 
left behind on the zinc rod. If a piece of metal wire is connected 
between the exposed ends of the zinc and copper rods these 
electrons will flow through the wire into the copper rod; this 
flow of electrons constitutes an electric current. The flow of 
electrons to the copper rod will cause it to become negatively 
charged, and it will therefore attract the positively charged 
hydrogen ions which will consequently collect around it. The 
excess of electrons contained by the copper rod will unite with 
the hydrogen ions to form atoms of hydrogen which will be 
liberated as diatomic gas molecules around the copper rod. The 
metal rods in a cell are called the electrodes, and the liquid in 
which they are immersed is called the electrolyte. 

It will be noticed from the above description that the copper 
electrode does not enter into the reaction; but the choice of the 



140 



Introducing Science 






-! 


e 

^ 


zinc 
electrode 


2 


e 


copper 
electrode 


H 2 S0 4 +2 
( 


Fsoi' 
2Zn+ 
*,"TT + I 


H 2 

t 
2H 




>ZLL T 


dilute sulphuric acid (H 2 SO 4 ) 



Fig. 21 

metal of which the electrode is made is important because 
different metals will produce different quantities of electrical 
energy. Not only can various metals be used, but a variety of 
electrolytes are also possible, so that a large number of different 
cells can be devised for producing electricity. The simple form 
of cell described above has certain practical disadvantages, but 
in a modified form it is widely used in *dry' batteries. 

Cells in which chemical energy is converted into electrical 
energy are called primary cells, while cells in which electrical 
energy is stored in the form of chemical energy, as for example 
the lead accumulator, are called secondary cells. 

Nearly all the reactions which occur in an electric cell are 
reversible. That is to say, the introduction of electrical energy 
into the cell will make the reaction go backwards. This reverse 
process, known as electrolysis, is used for coating one metal with 
another. Gold, silver, chromium, and tin are among the metals 
that are commercially plated on to cheaper metals in this way. 

Electric Potential, Current, and Resistance 
If the wire joining the electrodes of a primary cell is cut the 
chemical reaction will cease, but there will exist between the 
electrodes a potential force which is capable of producing energy 
if the wire is joined again. This is called an electro-motive force and 



Electrical Energy 1 4 1 

it is measured in units called volts. The cell described above has 
an electro-motive force of 1-1 volts. 

The number of electrons which flow through the wire in a given 
time is, of course, a measure of the quantity of electricity flowing, 
and this quantity is called the current which is measured in 
amperes. As a rough guide, the number of electrons which are 
required to light an electric lamp is about one million, million, 
million per second. 

The current which will flow through a wire, or any other 
conductor of electricity, depends on the force available to drive 
the electrons (i.e., the potential) and the resistance of the con- 
ductor. The resistance of a wire depends on the material of which 
it is made, its length, and its thickness. Obviously the thicker and 
shorter the wire, the lower its resistance. The resistance to the 
flow of electrons in any material can be simply measured and the 
unit of resistance is the ohm. 

Ohm's Law 

The three electrical units mentioned in the preceding paragraph, 
the volt, the ampere, and the ohm, have been so chosen that a 
potential of 1 volt will drive a current of 1 ampere through a 
resistance of 1 ohm. 

Furthermore, there is a simple law, called Ohm's Law after its 
formulator, relating these three quantities: namely that the 
voltage (V) is equal to the product of the resistance (R) and the 
current (7), or in symbols: V = IR. 

Energy of an Electric Current 

The energy that is available from an electric current is equal to 
the product of the current in amperes, the time for which it flows, 
and the voltage that drives it. The unit of electrical energy is 
called the watt-hour (Wh); thus a current of 1 ampere flowing 
for 1 hour at a potential of 1 volt will produce 1 watt-hour of 
electrical energy. 

When a current is passed through a wke, the wire is heated as 
a result of the passage of electrons, and the heat energy so 
generated can be used for a variety of purposes - heating the 
water in an electric kettle, for example. It will be remembered that 



142 Introducing Science 

in the last chapter we said that the heat energy required to bring 
an average-size kettle to the boil is about 85,000 calories. As 
1 watt-hour of electrical energy is equivalent to 860 calories of 
heat energy, we see that an average kettle would require just less 
than 100 watt-hours to bring its contents to the boil. In the 
London area the cost of 1,000 watt-hours (1 kilowatt-hour) is 
about Id., so that boiling a kettle should cost about rod. In 
practice the cost will be slightly more because some of the heat 
will be lost to the surroundings. 

ELECTRIC FIELDS 

We have shown in the last paragraphs how the movement of 
electrons constitutes an electric current, but so far we have not 
mentioned static electric charges which are also a familiar every- 
day experience. For example, if a poor conductor of electricity, 
such as amber or sealing wax, is rubbed with a silk cloth, the 
amber develops the power of attracting a small piece of matter 
such as a slip of paper. In this condition, a non-conductor is said 
to be charged with electricity. The mechanism of this charging 
process is that the rubbing motion strips the outside atoms of 
the amber of some of their electrons, so that at the surface of the 
material there is a residual positive electric charge. This positive 
charge exerts an attractive force on the electrons in the atoms of 
the paper, and consequently the paper adheres to the amber. 

If this simple experiment is carried out, it will be observed that 
the amber or sealing wax does not actually have to touch the 
paper before the attraction begins. The attractive force has the 
ability to bridge a small gap; in this gap there is said to be an 
electric field across which energy can be transmitted. In general, 
an electric field exists between any two charged particles of 
matter, and, as we shall learn, the transference of energy by an 
electric field in space is a most important conception in modern 
physics. This field is closely related to a magnetic field. 

MAGNETIC FIELDS 

Magnetic fields are familiar in association with bar and horseshoe 
magnets, which have the power of attracting small pieces of iron. 



Electrical Energy 143 

If a bar magnet is placed on a sheet of paper, on which tiny 
pieces of iron filings have been sprinkled, the direction of the 
magnetic forces can be directly observed by tapping the paper 
gently so that the filings arrange themselves along the so-called 
lines offeree of the magnet, as in Figure 22. The area over which 
these lines of force act is called the magnetic field, and again, as 
with electric fields, energy is transmitted through space. 




Fig. 22 

The nature of these magnetic forces is still to a large extent 
unexplained, although it is known that a single spinning electron 
will create a similar field on a miniature scale. It has also been 
shown that in a magnetized bar of iron the electrons are all 
spinning in the same direction, whereas in a non-magnetized bar 
the direction of electron-spin is at random. However, there is no 
satisfactory explanation as to why some conductors make better 
magnets than others, although this connexion between electrically 
charged particles and magnetic forces forms the basis of the 
whole theory of electro-magnetic radiation. 

It must be added that a freely pivoted bar magnet will always 
adopt a definite position with respect to the earth, such that one 
end points in the general direction of the North Pole and the 
other in the direction of the South Pole. This behaviour, which is 
of course the basis of the magnetic compass, occurs because the 
direction of the lines of force of the magnet strive to coincide 
with the direction of the lines of force of the earth's magnetic 



144 Introducing Science 

field. For convenience it is usual to refer to the north-seeking end 
of a magnet as its north pole, and its south-seeking end as its 
south pole. It is also a familiar experience that like magnetic 
poles repel each other and unlike poles attract each other, be- 
having in this respect in exactly the same manner as electric 
charges. 

Magnetic Effect of an Electric Current 

We have said that a single spinning electron behaves like a 
miniature magnet, and it is therefore not surprising to find that 
a current of electricity, which consists, as we have seen, of a 
stream of electrons all moving in the same direction, also exerts 
a magnetic field. 

This can be illustrated by sending a current through a wire 
which passes through a sheet of paper on to which iron filings 
have been sprinkled. Again, tapping the paper will show the lines 
of force, which in this case are circular and concentric with the 
wire (see Figure 23). During the passage of the current, the 
electrons all spin in the same direction, but when the current 
ceases to flow the direction of the spins returns to a random 
distribution, and consequently the magnetic field dies. 



direction of 
magnetic forces 




f direction of current 
Fig. 23 

If the piece of wire carrying the current is formed into a coil, 
the circular lines of force round the wire combine to produce a 
magnetic field which is somewhat similar to that produced by a 
bar magnet. This arrangement, which is called an electro-magnet, 
is illustrated in Figure 24. 

If a soft iron core is now inserted through the coil of wire, and 
an arrangement is made for switching the current on and off 



Electrical Energy 



145 










direction of 
magnetic forces 



Fig. 24 

rapidly, the core will become alternately magnetized and de- 
magnetized so that it will alternately attract and release a light 
piece of iron. If the piece of iron is pivoted at one end and fitted 
with a spring it can be made to vibrate in the changing magnetic 
field. This is the principle of the electromagnetic bell, as illustrated 
in Figure 25. It will be noticed that the trembler itself is used to 
switch the current on and off by making and breaking the circuit 
from the cell to the coil. 



hammer 



light iron trembler 




spring 



switch 



Fig. 25 



146 Introducing Science 

This principle of obtaining mechanical energy from electrical 
energy is brought to a higher degree of efficiency in the electric 
motor. 

Electromagnetic Induction 

If another piece of wire is looped round a coil, it will be found 
that, when the current to the coil is switched on or off, a current 
will flow through the loop of wire. This latter current is said to be 
an induced current, and it will occur only when the magnetic field 
round the coil is in a state of change. 

Another way of inducing a current, is to move a length of wire 
physically across a magnetic field so that it cuts the magnetic lines 
of force. This method is the principle of the dynamo, which con- 
sists essentially of a coil of wire rotating in a magnetic field. In 
this way the lines of force of the magnet are being cut by the 
rotating coil and a current is therefore developed in the coil. Thus 
the mechanical energy used to rotate the coil in the magnetic field 
is converted into electrical energy within the coil. The dynamo, 
or generator as larger machines are usually called, is one of the 
most economical methods of producing electricity on a large scale, 
and it is this method that is adopted in power stations. 

The exact reverse of a dynamo is the electric motor, in which 
the coil of wire is supplied with a current which is broken at 
regular intervals by a device known as a commutator; the result- 
ing magnetic forces cause the coil to rotate, so that electrical 
energy is transformed into mechanical energy. 

In general, then, we may say that any movement of an electric- 
ally charged particle, or any electric current, creates a magnetic 
force, and conversely any movement of a magnetic pole creates 
an electric force. 

The Electromagnetic Field 

We can extend this example of an induced current to the circuit 
illustrated in Figure 26 in which an electric cell supplies a stream 
of electrons to a coil of wire, A, through a switch, S. This switch 
is so arranged that it reverses the connexions of the cell to the 
coil A when it is rotated. Now, if the switch is continuously 
rotated by some mechanical means, the current in the coil A will 



Electrical Energy 147 

be constantly and regularly changing in direction. The field 
created by the constantly changing current is called an electro- 
magnetic field, and it will surround the coil A. 

If a second and similar coil of wire, B, is placed within this 
field, a constantly changing current will be induced in this coil, 
so that if an instrument for measuring current is placed across its 
ends the needle will swing backwards and forwards, indicating 
first a negative and then a positive current, depending on the 
position of the switch S. Such a current which regularly changes 

coil A coil B 



ammeter 




reversing 

switch 

S 



electro- 
magnetic 
field 



Fig. 26 



direction is called an alternating current., although the current 
produced from the apparatus shown would not be *pure\ How- 
ever, if we used a switch which gradually increased, decreased, 
and reversed the current in coil A and then took measurements 
of the current in coil B at very frequent intervals, and plotted 
them on a graph (Figure 27), we should find that the current 



> 

H -| 
^ sx 



u 






TIME 



Fig. 27 



148 Introducing Science 

would change from positive to negative in a smooth and regular 
manner. This is a typical wave-form, which is characteristic of the 
way in which energy is radiated from one piece of matter (coil A) 
to another (coil B) by an electromagnetic field in space. 

In general, any osculating current, or any vibrating electric 
charge, will produce the sort of electromagnetic field which we 
have described, and energy will be transmitted through the field, 
in the form of waves, at a definite speed which will be discussed 
on page 149. As it is not easy to visualize how energy can be 
transmitted by these electromagnetic waves, an analogy may 
help. Consider a long glass-sided trough filled with water, in 
which at one end a pencil is inserted and vigorously vibrated back 
and forth. The vibrations of the pencil will cause waves to run 
along the surface of the water which will have the appearance 
illustrated in Figure 28 - if we are able to assume that the trough 
is sufficiently long to be able to avoid the complications of waves 
reflected from the ends. 




Fig. 28 

If the water were to be examined carefully, it would be 
observed that no motion from one end of the trough to the other 
was taking place; each particle of water would be simply moving 
up or down. If a cork with a nail sticking out of it were to be 
floated in the water in the middle of the trough, it would be 
found that the cork bobbed up and down in the waves. The nail 
sticking into the cork could be made to hit a bell on its upstroke, 
thus showing how the mechanical energy of the moving pencil 
could be transferred by a wave-motion to the cork, where some 
of it is used again as mechanical energy in ringing a bell. 



Electrical Energy 149 

This analogy breaks down badly over the question of the 
medium through which the waves are radiated. In the trough the 
waves are supported in the medium of the water, in the case of 
electromagnetic waves, no medium whatsoever is required. In 
our example of the two coils A and B, both could have been 
housed in a container from which all the air had been evacuated. 
Although it is not easy to visualize, It must be accepted that 
electromagnetic waves can travel through empty space. 

Electromagnetic Waves 

It is now necessary to return to an examination of the character- 
istics of the electromagnetic waves themselves. The two chief 
characteristics of a wave are its amplitude and its wave-length 




1 wave-length - 



amplitude 




1 cycle H 

Fig. 29 

(Figure 29). The amplitude, or height, is a measure of the amount 
of energy it contains (the energy is actually proportional to the 
square of the amplitude) while its wave-length determines its 
nature. Very long electromagnetic waves (several hundreds of 
metres) are those used in ordinary sound broadcasting; very short 
waves, as will be explained in the next chapter, transfer energy to 
which our eyes are sensitive - that is to say they are light waves. 

It has already been mentioned that electromagnetic waves travel 
at a definite speed - this speed does not depend on the wave- 
length, and is the same for all electromagnetic radiations. For 
historical reasons it is usually referred to as the 'velocity of 
light', although it would be more correct to speak of the 'velocity 
of electromagnetic radiation*. 

We shall show later that the velocity of light has a special 



150 Introducing Science 

significance in the universe (see page 194); for the moment we 
will simply give its value, which is 186,000 miles per second, or 
300 million metres per second. Slight variations in this velocity 
occur depending on the medium through which the waves are 
travelling; the figures given represent the velocity in space. It is 
not always convenient to refer to a wave's length, because this 
will vary with the speed of the wave and will change if the wave 
passes from one medium to another. It is, therefore, often prefer- 
able to refer to the frequency with which a cycle (i.e., a complete 
wave-length) is repeated. It is a simple mathematical calculation 
to show that the number of cycles per second, which is called the 
frequency of the wave, is equal to the speed at which the wave is 
travelling, divided by its wave-length. We are, of course, familiar 
with both these terms when we tune our radios. For example, the 
wave-length of the London Home Service of the BBC is 330 

300 000 000 

metres, and the frequency is therefore ~ - =908,000 



cycles per second, or, using the usual term, kilocycle (i.e., 1,000 
cycles), 330 metres is equivalent to 908 kilocycles per second. 

In Table 4 (page 151) the full range of wave-lengths and 
frequencies for all known electromagnetic waves are given. The 
study of each group of frequencies is the study of radiant energy, 
which forms the subject-matter of the next chapter. 

Very Large and Small Numbers 

It will have become apparent during the course of this book that 
in science it is often necessary to refer both to very large and 
very small numbers. When dealing with the full range of fre- 
quencies and wave-lengths of electromagnetic radiations this 
problem becomes particularly acute, and for such purposes it 
would be extremely cumbersome to have to speak of millions of 
millions of cycles or million millionths of metres. It would be 
equally inconvenient to have recourse to rows of noughts either 
before or after the significant figures. 

To overcome this difficulty a very simple notation is used in 
which the number of noughts which follow or precede the 
significant figures are indicated by raising 10 to the appropriate 
power, for example: 



Electrical Energy 



151 



Table 4 



wave-length 
in metres 



frequency in 
kilocycles per second 



10- 15 - 
10- 14 - 


cosmic-ray frequencies 


-IO 20 
-IO 19 


10- 13 - 
10- 12 - 


y-ray frequencies 


-IO 18 
-IO 17 


io n - 

1O 10 - 

io- 9 - 


X-ray frequencies 


-IO 16 
-IO 15 
-10 14 


1C- 8 - 

io- 7 - 


ultra-violet frequencies 


-IO 13 

1 AI2 


10- 6 -i 


visible light 


-10" 


IO 5 - 
10- 4 - 


infra-red frequencies 


-10" 
-IO 10 


io- 3 - 
io- 2 - 
io- 1 - 
1 - 

10 - 
IO 2 - 
10* - 

1 f\A 


radio frequencies 


-10* 
-10" 
-IO 7 
-10 s 
-10 s 
-10* 
-IO 3 
-IO 2 


10* - 
10 s - 

10 - 

in? 


*audio* frequencies 


-10 

- 1 

- 0-1 


1U' - 




- 0-01 



152 Introducing Science 

10* = 10 

102 = 100 

103 = 1,000 

and so forth. Thus, 10 6 = 1 million and 10 12 = 1 million million. 
Using this notation, the number 5,420,000 would be written 
542 x 10 6 . 
On the same principle: 

10"i = 1/10 = 0-1 
10-2 = 1/100 = 0-01 
10-6 = i millionth 

Thus, four millionths would be written 4-0 x 1Q- 6 . 
This notation will be used throughout the rest of the book. 



CHAPTER 10 

RADIANT ENERGY 



IN the previous chapter we have shown how energy can be radi- 
ated through space in the form of electromagnetic waves, which 
are created by the oscillation or vibration of an electric charge or 
collection of charges. It has also been explained that the pro- 
perties of these waves depend on their frequencies, which can 
vary from about 20 cycles per second to about 10 24 cycles per 
second. 

We now come to study the sources which produce these 
oscillations and the properties that characterize each group of 
frequencies. For convenience we will start at the lower end of the 
frequency scale and work our way upwards. 



RADIO FREQUENCY WAVES 

Radio frequency waves fall within the frequency band 20 cycles 
per second to 10 7 kilocycles per second (i.e. 10 10 cycles per 
second), and are all produced by the oscillation of a current of 
electrons in specially designed circuits, the principles of which 
we shall shortly outline. Radio waves, however, are themselves 
subdivided into several groups according to wave-length or 
frequency, as in Table 5. 

Table 5 

Wave-length Frequency, 

kilocycles per 

in metres f 

second 

Audio frequencies Over 10,000 Below 30 

Long and medium wave 10,000-100 30-3,000 

Short wave 100-10 3,000-30,000 

Very high frequency 10-1 30,000-3 x 105 

Ultra high frequency 1-0-1 3 x 105-3 x 106 

Radar frequency 0-1-O-01 3 x 10^-3 x 10? 



1 54 Introducing Science 

The lowest frequencies are called audio frequencies because 
they correspond to the frequencies of sound waves to which our 
ears are sensitive. It will therefore be necessary to digress briefly 
on the subject of the transmission of energy by sound waves, 
although these are not, of course, electromagnetic waves. 



SOUND WAVES 

If a stretched wire or string is plucked, it will vibrate in a regular 
manner at a definite frequency which will depend on the thick- 
ness and material of the string, its tension, and its unsupported 
length. 

The energy of the vibrating string will cause the surrounding 
molecules of air to vibrate in a similar manner, so that a sound- 
wave will be transmitted in all directions through the air with a 
frequency identical to that of the vibrating string. This wave, 
when it impinges on the ear-drum, will cause a vibration to pass 
through the bone and nerves of the inner ear to the brain. The 
ear, being a very delicate instrument, is capable of differentiating 
between frequencies in the whole range of audibility, and the 
brain will register that a certain note has been sounded. The 
range of human audibility is from about 20 cycles per second to 
about 20,000 cycles per second (although with advancing age the 
upper limit becomes somewhat reduced), and any periodic 
vibration of matter, in any form, within this frequency range will 
cause an audible sound. 

All sounds have three characteristics, namely: pitch, loudness, 
and quality (or timbre). 

The pitch of a sound depends solely on its frequency: a pure 
musical note consists of one basic frequency; for example, middle 
C on the piano has a basic frequency of 256 cycles per second. 
Doubling the frequency produces a note one octave higher, and 
the musical scale is developed by dividing the octave into twelve 
approximately equal intervals. 

The loudness of a sound depends on the amount of energy 
contained by the wave by which it is transmitted and is related 
directly to its amplitude. 



Radiant Energy 155 

The quality or timbre of a sound depends on the number and 
strength of the overtones which are produced together with the 
basic frequency. In the example of the stretched string we said 
that the string vibrates at a fixed frequency, dependent, amongst 
other things, on its length. A string, or a vibrating column of 
air, however, has the ability of dividing itself into two, three, four, 
or more parts, each part itself vibrating at a frequency character- 
istic of the divided length. The notes so produced are called 
overtones, and they are distinguishable, by a trained musician, 
from the basic note. Every source of sound will have a character- 
istic quality depending upon the extent to which these overtones 
are produced. It is for this reason that, say, a piano and a clarinet 
produce differing sounds at the same pitch (i.e. the same 
frequency). 

The transmission of energy in the form of sound waves has 
very much in common with the transmission of energy by electro- 
magnetic waves, but there are three important differences. Firstly, 
sound waves cannot be radiated through empty space - they 
require matter for their propagation (solid, liquid, or gaseous). 
Secondly, they travel much more slowly than electromagnetic 
waves; the speed of sound depends on the material through which 
it is passing, being faster in solids than in liquids, and faster in 
liquids than in gases; but, as an example, the velocity of sound 
in air (at sea-level) is about 740 miles per hour, which is of course 
slower than our fastest (supersonic) aeroplanes. 

The third difference between sound and electromagnetic 
waves is that the former are longitudinal waves, whereas the 
latter are transverse waves. This statement requires a few words 
of explanation. In a transverse wave the undulations are at right 
angles to the direction of the wave; in the glass-sided trough, 
mentioned in the last chapter (page 148), the cork bobbed up 
and down in the vertical plane, while the wave was travelling in 
the horizontal plane. This is a typical transverse wave and electro- 
magnetic waves are of this type. In a longitudinal wave, however, 
the movement of the particles is back and forth, in the same 
direction as the wave, not across it as with a transverse wave. 
This means that a sound-wave in air consists of alternating regions 
of pressure and rarefaction progressing along the wave. 



156 Introducing Science 

The Conversion of Sound into Electric Currents 
Sound waves can be converted into electric currents by a micro- 
phone, the simplest type of which consists of an arrangement 
very similar to the electric bell which we have already described 
in the last chapter. In this kind of microphone, however, the 
trembler of the bell is replaced by a thin metal diaphragm which 
is firmly secured round its edges. When the sound waves impinge 
on this diaphragm it is caused to vibrate, and therefore to cut 
the lines of force of the electro-magnet (see Figure 30) at exactly 
the frequency of the impinging sound. The current thereby in- 
duced in the coil of the electro-magnet will also oscillate at the 
frequency of the original sound, and can be led through a wire to 
any desired destination, where it can be re-created as a sound wave 
by an exactly similar process in reverse. This is the principle of 
the telephone. 



microphone earphone 

sound-wave ' coil It audio frequency current || sound-wave 

/ A/V-^ 

vibrating * 
metal 
diaphragm 

Fig. 30 

The microphone shown in this figure is of the simplest type; 
better quality instruments employ different techniques to achieve 
the same end. In this example, the current has been re-created as 
a sound wave by a metal diaphragm, which is only suitable for 
reproducing a small volume of sound. To create sound waves of 
greater volume and fidelity a loudspeaker is required, which 
consists essentially of a similar arrangement to the earphone, 
except that the metal diaphragm is replaced by a vibrating paper 
cone. As a loudspeaker causes a far greater quantity of air to 
vibrate it requires greater energy for its operation, and therefore 
an amplifier is required in the circuit. 




Radiant Energy 157 

Electronic Amplifiers 

Electronic amplifiers are based either on the electronic valve or 
on the transistor ; the mode of operation of the former is described 
below and illustrated in Figure 31. 

If two wires from a high-voltage battery (a collection of electric 
cells joined together) are sealed into a glass tube so that their 
ends are separated by an air space, no current will flow between 
the wires because the electrons cannot escape from the surface 
of the metal of the wire. If, however, the wire connected to the 
negative terminal of the battery is heated to red heat, and the 
air is removed from the tube, the electrons will break free from 
the metal and will collect in a cloud around the negative wire 
(which is called the cathode). As the other wire is connected to 
the positive terminal of the battery, this wire (which is called the 
anode) will become positively charged, and will therefore attract 
the 'free' electrons liberated by the cathode. A current of 
electrons will then flow from the cathode to the anode. It should 
be noted that this device will only allow current to flow in the one 
direction, and it is for this reason that it is known in Britain as 
a valve. 

If a wire gauze is inserted into the glass tube and fixed into 
position between the two electrodes, the electrons will have to 
flow through this gauze (which is called the grid). If the grid is 
negatively charged it will repel the negative electrons emitted by 
the cathode, and the current will cease to flow to the anode. If, 
on the other hand, the grid is made positively charged, but less 
so than the anode, it will attract the electrons and accelerate 
them on their path to the anode, thus increasing the current 
flowing through the valve. 

It can be appreciated, therefore, that by choosing a suitable 
iked grid voltage (or bias as it is called) the flow of current can 
be controlled by small fluctuations in voltage superimposed on 
this grid bias. Thus, if a weak oscillating current is fed into a 
suitably biased grid, a similar oscillation of greater amplitude 
will be reproduced in the main current flowing from the cathode 
to the anode. The energy output of the anode-cathode circuit can 
be made very large by suitable valve design and circuit character- 
istics, as it is not dependent on the energy-input to the grid. In 



158 



Introducing Science 



anode 
grid 



high-energy 
output 




cathode -^ 



high-voltage 
battery 



low-voltage 
battery 



Fig. 31 



this way a weak grid current can be amplified into a strong anode 
current, so that if the output of a microphone is fed into the 
grid of such a valve sufficient energy might be produced at the 
anode to operate a loudspeaker. Greater amplification can of 
course be produced by using two or more such valves in series. 
The valve described above contains three electrodes and is there- 
fore called a triode; more powerfully amplifying valves can also 
be used containing four electrodes (tetrodes) or five electrodes 
(pentodes). 

Transistors, also used as electronic amplifiers, make use of the 
characteristics of very pure crystals of certain substances to con- 
duct electricity hi one direction only under certain conditions, 
By using a sandwich of three such semi-conductor crystals, the 
centre layer may be made to act like the grid in the electronic 
valve and amplification can be achieved on a similar principle. 
Transistors have the advantage over valves that they are much 
smaller and lighter, and furthermore they do not need to be 
heated in order to produce a flow of electrons. 

Broadcasting Electromagnetic Waves 

We have seen how sound waves can be transformed into electric 
currents, and how these currents can be amplified. We now come 



Radiant Energy 159 

to consider the transmission, or broadcasting, of electromagnetic 
waves over long distances. 

For a variety of reasons, it is not practicable to transmit radio 
waves of very low frequencies - for one thing the transmitting 
aerial would have to be impossibly large. It is therefore not 
possible to broadcast electromagnetic waves of audio frequencies, 
and for long-distance transmission it is necessary to resort to 
higher frequencies and therefore shorter wave-lengths; the wave- 
lengths actually used vary from about 1 metre to 2,000 metres, 
(See Table 5 on p. 153.) 

In general, electromagnetic waves of radio frequency are propa- 
gated through the earth's atmosphere in two ways; namely, 
ground waves which travel over the surface of the earth, and sky 
waves, which leave the surface of the earth and are reflected back 
by ionized layers of the outer atmosphere between 60 and 400 
miles above the earth's surface. This ionized region of the 
atmosphere is called the ionosphere and is divided into layers, two 
of which are known as the Heaviside-Kennelly layer and the 
Appleton layer after their discoverers. 

The ionization of the atoms and molecules in the ionosphere is 
largely caused by the action of the ultra-violet radiation (see 
page 185) from the sun, and therefore the conditions for reflecting 
sky waves vary from day to night. After sunset the degree of 
ionization in the lower (Heaviside) layer falls off due to the re- 
combination of ions, and reflection is then effected by the higher 
(Appleton) layer, which being less dense (fewer collisions occur- 
ring between ions and electrons) remains ionized for longer 
periods. Figure 32 illustrates the two methods of transmission. 

Appleton layer 



ionosphere Heaviside-Kennelly layer 

x xx^ x ^v v . sky waves 



transmitting |_^^_^^^^._-_._... r .. receiving 

aerial f " >>j aerial 



Fig. 32 



160 Introducing Science 

Long waves (in the radio-frequency band) are transmitted as 
ground waves and therefore lose a good deal of their energy in 
passing through ground obstacles; they consequently have only 
a limited range. The shorter waves, however, escape more easily 
from the surface of the earth and can be received over greater 
distances owing to their reflection back to the earth by the 
ionosphere. Very short waves pass through the ionosphere so they 
cannot be used for long-distance communications. This is why 
the range of TV stations is limited. 

Modulation 

We have explained that, for long-distance radio transmission, 
frequencies far in excess of audio frequencies have to be used 
and, therefore, in order to transmit sound by radio, a combina- 
tion of the transmitting frequency and the audio frequency has to 
be arranged. This can be achieved by controlling, or modulating, 
the amplitude of the higji-frequency wave (called the carrier) in 
accordance with the frequency of the sound wave. This process is 
called amplitude modulation and is illustrated in Figure 33. 

audio frequency wave 




carrier wave of 
radio frequency 




Fig. 33 



carrier wave modulated 
by audio frequency 



Amplitude modulation is the commonest principle used in 
radio transmission; however, a more recent technique called 
frequency modulation is also used when especially high fidelity is 
required. In this method the frequency and not the amplitude of 
the carrier-wave is modulated by the audio frequency, so that the 



Radiant Energy 161 

modulated carrier would have the shape shown in Figure 34. 
In order to complete our outline of radio broadcasting it will 
now be necessary to describe briefly the method of creating 
carrier-waves in the transmitter, and the method of demodulating: 
the carrier in the receiver so that an audio-frequency current 
can be amplified and fed into the loudspeaker. 





Fig. 34 
Transmitters 

Firstly, then, we must refer to the production of high-frequency 
oscillations suitable for use as a carrier-wave. 

In our discussion, so far, the only sources of oscillation for the 
production of electromagnetic waves have been mechanical - a 
rotating switch, a rotating coil in a magnetic field, and a moving 
diaphragm operated by the pressure-waves of sound. Now that 
we come to higher frequencies such mechanical devices are un- 
suitable because of the inertia associated with matter of relatively 
large mass. Instead, the oscillations must be produced by making 
the current of electrons itself self-oscillating. This is achieved by 
using a resonant circuit, the operation of which will now be 
outlined. 

The Resonant Circuit 

A resonant circuit consists of an induction coil, such as that in 
Figure 24, connected to an electrical condenser. A condenser 
consists simply of two metal plates separated by a non-conductor 
of electricity, such as mica; this device is capable of storing 
electrical charges by virtue of the electrons that collect on one of 
its plates when it is charged. If the condenser is connected to an 
electric cell it will become charged (Figure 35a), and if the cell is 
subsequently replaced by an induction coil (Figure 35b), the con- 
denser will discharge itself through the induction coil, thus 
creating a magnetic field round the coil. 
6 



162 



Introducing Science 



condenser 



flow of current 



cell 
Fig. 35a 




induction coil 
Fig. 35b 



As soon as the condenser is completely discharged the current 
will cease to flow and the magnetic field will collapse. As we have 
seen, a changing magnetic field always creates a current, and 
therefore a secondary current will be induced in the coil in the 
opposite direction to the main current. This secondary, or self- 
induced current, will now charge up the condenser in an opposite 
manner to the original charge (Figure 35c), and again the con- 
denser will discharge itself through the coil, so that a continuous 
oscillation will be set up in the circuit. The frequency of this 
oscillation will depend on the capacity of the condenser to store 
electricity and the ability of the coil to create a magnetic field. 



induced current <^ 
Fig. 35c 

It will be observed that the circuit we have described is in some 
respects similar to a pendulum swinging backwards and forwards, 
and, like a pendulum, it will eventually come to rest as the result 
of friction unless some means is used to supply it with energy to 
overcome this friction. In the case of a clock, the energy is 
supplied to the pendulum by a spring or a falling weight through 
a catchment. Similarly, the resonant circuit cannot oscillate 



Radiant Energy 163 

Indefinitely as energy has to be consumed in overcoming the 
resistance to the flow of current through the wire - that is to say 
energy has to be supplied to drive the electrons back and forth 
through the wire of the coil. Clearly a device is required which 
will supply this energy at precisely the right moment, just as the 
catchment supplies energy to the pendulum at precisely the right 
moment. 

This energy can be supplied to a resonant circuit by using an 
electronic valve of the type that we have already described, in the 
following manner. If the oscillating current of a resonant circuit 
is fed into the grid of a triode valve, an identical but stronger 
oscillation will be produced in the anode circuit of the valve. If 
this oscillating anode current is used to reinforce the original 
oscillation in the resonant circuit the whole device will oscillate 
indefinitely, as energy is being fed into the system from the 
batteries operating the valve. 

An elementary radio carrier-wave transmitter is illustrated in 
Figure 36, the conventional symbols being used for the com- 
ponents in the circuit. In the particular type of circuit illustrated, 
it will be noticed that the oscillation in the resonant circuit is 
reinforced from the anode circuit by means of a second induction 
coil, and that the final electromagnetic wave can be transmitted 
into the atmosphere from an aerial in the anode circuit. 



smitting aerial 




condenser 



Fig. 36 



164 Introducing Science 

An arrangement of this type, of course, only produces the 
carrier- wave; additional circuits are required for carrying out the 
modulation by an audio-frequency, but we are not here con- 
cerned with the details of transmitter design. 

Receivers 

We must now consider the methods used in a radio receiver for 
demodulating the electromagnetic radiations sent out by the 
transmitter so that they will operate a loudspeaker. 

Broadly speaking a radio receiver has two main functions to 
perform; firstly, it has to select the required radiation from all the 
other electromagnetic waves that are present over the surface of 
the earth, and secondly it has to separate (or demodulate) the 
audio-frequency current from the radio-frequency carrier. 

The selection is effected by making use of a resonant circuit of 
the type already described. If a resonant circuit in the receiver is 
tuned so that it will oscillate at the same frequency as the carrier- 
wave which is to be received, clearly, of all the electromagnetic 
waves picked up by the receiving aerial, the only one to be 
selectively strengthened will be the one with a frequency exactly 
fitting the resonance of the tuned circuit. We are familiar with 
this aspect of resonance in connexion with sound-waves ; if a note 
is played on a piano, or other musical instrument, in a room 
which contains a glass tumbler with a natural resonant frequency 
the same as that of the note, then the glass will vibrate in 
resonance with the note. 

The receiving aerial, then, collects the modulated carrier-wave 
and feeds it into a circuit which is tuned to resonate at the 
frequency of the carrier-wave. This tuning can be effected by 
altering the capacity of a condenser, which, as we have seen, is 
one of the ways of controlling the frequency at which a resonant 
circuit will oscillate. For example, the frequency of the carrier- 
wave of the BBC Home Service is 908 kilocycles per second, and 
when we turn the tuning-knob of our radio-sets we usually alter 
the capacity of a variable condenser so that the tuning-circuit 
will resonate at this frequency. 

We have said that the second function of a receiver is that of 
demodulating the carrier-wave; again, this operation can be per- 



Radiant Energy 165 

formed by using an electronic valve. So far the only use we have 
made of valves has been for amplification, but they also serve 
another purpose - rectification - that is to say they will only permit 
current to flow in one direction. Thus, if a modulated carrier- 
wave is fed into the grid of a triode valve, and the bias of the 
grid is correctly arranged, only current flowing in one direction 
will be passed through the valve, and the bottom half, or negative 
swing, of the wave will be cut off, as in Figure 37. It will be seen 




full-wave input 



Fig. 37 

that the shape traced by the peaks of the emergent half of the 
carrier-waves is the same as the original audio-frequency current, 
and, if these half-waves are fed into earphones or a loudspeaker, 
the original sound wave will be reproduced. The half-waves of 
the carrier themselves will not, of course, affect the earphones or 
loudspeaker as their frequency is far too high. Demodulation has 
therefore been achieved by the use of an electronic valve as a 
rectifier. 

Rectification can also be brought about by the use of certain 
crystals, which have this property of allowing current to pass in 
one direction only. These crystals were used in the early days of 
radio in crystal sets; transistors are a more modern application of 
the same principle. 

From what we have said above it is evident that a simple 
receiver can be constructed from a resonant circuit and a valve 
feeding a pair of earphones as illustrated in Figure 38. More 
complicated circuits are of course used in practice, but the 
arrangement illustrated would be a quite workable means of 
receiving radio signals. 



166 



Introducing Science 



\I/ aerial 



tunini 
condenser. 




earphones 



ig_* 



'earth grid bias battery high-voltage battery 
Fig. 38 

The general arrangement of simple radio transmission and re- 
ception is summarized in Figure 39. 

Radar 

Electromagnetic waves with a frequency higher than ordinary 
radio short-waves, that is waves of between about 1 and 10 centi- 
metres in length, are reflected by large solid objects in much the 
same manner as light. They are, however, able to travel greater 
distances than light in the earth's atmosphere, because they are 
not reflected or diffused by small dust particles in the atmosphere. 
If, therefore, a transmitter sends out a beam of these centimetric 
waves, an adjacent receiver can be made to pick up any of the 
beam that is reflected back by a large solid object, and in this way 
distant objects, which are not visible by light, can be located. By 
suitable scanning arrangements, the position and shape of the 
object can be outlined on a cathode-ray tube. Thus, electro- 
magnetic waves of these frequencies, which have come to be 
called radar frequencies, provide a method of 'seeing' in the dark 
or in fog. 

Having now outlined the production and use of electro- 
magnetic energy in the audio- and radio-frequency bands, we may 
pass to an examination of infra-red frequencies. 



HEAT WAVES OR INFRA-RED RADIATION 

So far we have been dealing with radiant energy to which the 
human senses are not directly responsive. (It will be recalled that 



Radiant Energy 

transmitting aerial 



167 




Fig. 39 

our ears cannot detect electromagnetic waves of audio frequency, 
although they respond to pressure waves in the air of these fre- 
quencies.) Now, however, that we come to waves of length about 
one hundredth to one ten-thousandth of a centimetre, we are 
dealing with radiant heat to which the nerves of the skin are 
sensitive. 

In Figure 19 (page 129) it was shown that heat energy is con- 
verted into radiant energy by hot body radiation, and it is a 
common experience that a hot body of matter can cause the 
nerves of the skin to register the sensation of heat, even when the 
skin is not in contact with the hot body, and even when the hot 
body is not radiating visible light. Such radiant heat, or infra-red 
radiation* is transferred by electromagnetic waves within the 
waveband which we are now considering. These waves have fre- 
quencies of from about a million million cycles per second to 
100 million, million cycles per second, and such extremely rapid 
oscillations cannot ordinarily be produced by a current of 
electrons oscillating backwards and forwards in a circuit. At these 



168 Introducing Science 

very high frequencies the only oscillators with sufficiently small 

inertia are individual atoms or molecules. 

We have seen that an electromagnetic field results when 
electric charges and their associated magnetic fields are in a state 
of movement, and we have also seen that the atoms and molecules 
of matter consist essentially of electric charges. As we know that 
atoms and molecules are in a continual state of vibration (and 
rotation, in the case of gases) it is only to be expected that these 
movements should create electromagnetic radiations. It is an 
observed fact that vibrations (and rotations) of atomic and 
molecular particles cause electromagnetic waves in the radiant 
heat wave-band. 

By raising the temperature of a body we add energy to the 
atoms and molecules of which it consists, and therefore cause 
them to vibrate more rapidly. The higher the temperature the 
faster the vibrations and consequently the higher the frequency 
of the radiation emitted. This increase in frequency continues in 
the radiant heat-band until a wave-length of about 6-5 x lQ- 5 cm. 
is reached. This is the wave-length of the first visible electro- 
magnetic radiation - it is the wave-length of red light; it is for 
this reason that bodies glow red when their temperatures are 
raised sufficiently. We shall, however, come to light-waves in the 
next section; for the present we are considering radiations that are 
infra- (i.e., less-than) red. 

Planck's Constant 

In our introductory remarks concerning the nature of energy we 
referred to its discontinuity and pointed out that, as the quanta 
of energy are small, they need only be taken into account when 
dealing with individual atoms or molecules. Now that we have 
seen that infra-red radiation results from the vibrations of atoms 
and molecules, we can expect that Quantum Theory considera- 
tions must hold in this waveband. This is, in fact, the case, and 
in order to be able to account for the radiation of heat in a 
detailed and mathematical way it is essential to think of electro- 
magnetic waves as being emitted in quanta, or short bursts of 
energy - each quantum being of a definite size. 
The size of these energy quanta depends on the frequency of the 



Radiant Energy 169 

emitted radiation and can be calculated fay simply multiplying 
the frequency by a universal constant which is known as Planck's 
Constant (after the discoverer). This constant (which is symbolized 
by the letter A) figures in all the equations of contemporary 
physics which are in any way connected with the energy of 
individual atoms. As the value of Planck's constant is very small 
indeed, i.e., 6-6 x 10~ 27 erg seconds (an erg is a unit of energy 
equal to 24 x 10~ 8 calories), the quanta of energy are also very 
small and therefore, as we have already stated, need not be taken 
into account when dealing with any large quantity of matter. For 
atomic particles, however, they have a restrictive effect in that 
only certain speeds of vibration or rotation are possible - that is > 
speeds that will give whole numbers of energy quanta, because 
parts of a quantum cannot exist. 

From these quantum considerations we have to accept the 
difficult conception that electromagnetic waves of energy are not 
simply analogous to waves in a pond of water, but that they are 
given out in short bursts. These bursts, as the wave-lengths 
become shorter, develop properties that we associate with 
particles. Furthermore, as we shall see later, electrons, which 
appear as particles, also have certain properties associated with 
waves. These paradoxes are partly resolved by the theory of 
wave mechanics, which we shall refer to on page 178. 

Having briefly described infra-red radiations and the necessity 
for thinking in terms of quanta, we can now pass into the range 
of visible wave-lengths. 



LIGHT RADIATION 

The most familiar of all electromagnetic radiations are those to 
which the retina of the eye is sensitive, that is, those which we 
call light. It should provoke humility to reflect that our total 
visual conception of the universe is formed by those electro- 
magnetic radiations which are emitted or reflected by matter, 
within the very narrow waveband of 44 x 10~ 5 cm. to 6-5 x 
10~ 5 cm. A glance at Table 4 (page 151) will show just how 
narrow this waveband really is. 



170 Introducing Science 

The Visible Spectrum 

To appreciate the meaning of colour in the universe, we must 

now consider the structure of the visible spectrum. 

If a ray of white light, from the sun or an electric lamp, is 
passed through a glass prism (a solid of triangular cross-section), 
the white light will be split up into a range of different colours, 
as in Figure 40. These seven colours are the principal colours of 
the visible spectrum, and each colour corresponds to a definite 
frequency and wave-length. The wave-length of red light is the 
longest, being 6-5 x 10~ 5 cm., and the wave-length of the violet 
light is the shortest at 4*1 x 10~ 5 cm. Electromagnetic radiation 
of shorter wave-length than that of violet light ceases to be 
visible to the human eye, and such shorter waves belong to the 
ultra-violet region, which we shall discuss in the next section. 




Fig. 40 

Although we have illustrated the visible spectrum as seven 
separate colours, it is important to realize that each colour merges 
into the next, so that between each one of the seven pure colours 
there exists a narrow region of blended colours. The visible 
spectrum of colours is familiar to us in the rainbow, which results 
from the sun's light being split up into its constituent colours as it 
passes through rain-drops. 

Refraction of Light 

From the remarks which we have made it will be apparent that 
white light is nothing more than a mixture of all the colours of 
the visible spectrum in certain proportions. In order to discover 
the reasons for the separation of these components when white 



Radiant Energy 111 

light passes from one medium to another (e.g., air to glass, air 
to water), we have to examine the causes of the refraction of light. 
All electromagnetic radiations travel at exactly the same velocity 
in empty space, but this velocity is reduced when they pass 
through matter. The extent of the reduction depends on the 
nature of the matter and the frequency of the radiation - the 
higher the frequency the greater the reduction in velocity. If 
the frequency of a radiation remains unchanged, and the speed of 
travel is reduced, it will be obvious from the considerations on 
page 150 that the wave-length will be shortened. The result of this 
shortening of the wave-length is to cause a bending or refraction 
of the wave at the interface between two mediums, as illustrated 
in Figure 41. 



interface between 
glass and air 




Fig. 41 

Clearly, then, when white light enters a prism, the violet com- 
ponent, owing to its higher frequency, will suffer a greater 
shortening of wave-length than the red component and will there- 
fore be refracted through a greater angle than the red light. The 
intermediate colours will be refracted through intermediate 
angles, and the overall result of the refraction of white light will 
be to separate its components according to their frequencies. A 
prism has been chosen to illustrate this point because two re- 
fractions occur, one at each face, the effect of the second 
refraction being to amplify the first. We have said that the extent 
to which a wave of light is refracted depends on the frequency of 
the wave and also upon the material causing the refraction. Every 
material behaves in a characteristic manner in this respect, which 
is defined by its so-called refractive index. 



172 Introducing Science 

Colour 

In our description of light so far, we have mentioned only white 

light and the way in which it is split into its component colours. 

We have not explained why non-emitters of light can have 

distinctive colours, and we must now consider this question. 

The pages of this book do not emit light, but they reflect the 
light from the sun, or an artificial source such as an electric lamp. 
The paper of the page appears to be white, because it is a good 
reflector and reflects back to the reader's eye all the colours 
emitted by the source of light which illuminates it. On the other 
hand, the ink appears black, because it is a bad reflector and it 
absorbs all the light that falls upon it so that no light is reflected 
from its surface to the eye of the reader. Lipstick, for example, 
is red because it absorbs all the white light that falls upon it 
except the red component, which it reflects. Similarly, grass is 
green because it reflects only the green component of the sun's 
light. Furthermore, if a tube of lipstick is taken into a darkroom, 
where there is only a red light, it will still appear red, because red 
light is available for reflection. A blade of grass, however, will 
appear black, because there is no green light available for it to 
reflect. 

Thus, the colour of a non-emitter of light is purely a question 
of the colours which it absorbs and the colours which it reflects. 
We shall learn later about the factors which control whether a 
particular atom or molecule will absorb or reflect a radiation of 
a particular frequency (or colour). 

The Emission of Light 

In the last section it was shown that electromagnetic radiation 
of infra-red frequencies was produced as a result of the vibrations 
and rotations of atoms and molecules. However, even atoms are 
too heavy to oscillate at the frequencies corresponding to light, 
and we now have to consider the movements of the orbital 
electrons of the individual atoms. 

It might be thought that the high-speed rotation of an electron 
in its orbit round the nucleus of an atom could, in itself, consti- 
tute a source of electromagnetic radiation of frequency equal to 
the speed of rotation. Such a supposition would be in accord with 



Radiant Energy 173 

everything we have said so far about the movement of electric 
charges and electromagnetic fields. It does, however, illustrate 
the danger of trying to use common-sense reasoning within the 
atom. As we shall see, when we come to examine the nucleus in 
more detail, the laws which apply to electric charges outside the 
atom do not appear to be obeyed within the nucleus. 

The apparently reasonable explanation which we have suggest- 
ed for the emission of light by orbital electrons of atoms can be 
shown to be incorrect by means of a simple experiment. If pure 
hydrogen gas is heated sufficiently it will emit light, and if this 
light is passed through a prism it will be found that narrow and 
distinct lines occur in place of the continuous visible spectrum 
derived from white light. Of these lines two predominate as the 
most persistent, one red and the other green. 

Clearly, then, hydrogen is only capable of emitting radiation 
at certain distinct frequencies. On the other hand, if the rotation 
of the electron was the source, one would expect a continuous 
range of colours to be emitted, because the emission of energy by 
the electron (and there is only one in the hydrogen atom) would 
cause it to slow down gradually and thus produce radiation of 
ever-decreasing frequency. The fact that the visible spectrum of 
hydrogen consists of separate lines indicates that some other 
mechanism must be sought to account for radiations of optical 
frequencies. As we shall see later, in the final answer it is necessary 
to reconsider the idea of an electron as a particle, but before 
abandoning this helpful conception altogether we can make use 
of it once more. 

The Bohr Atom 

In our analysis of matter we described the electrons surrounding 
the nucleus of an atom as arranging themselves into 'shells' (see 
page 30). In order to visualize the manner in which energy is 
stored by these electrons, we must now depict them as being 
capable of existence at different energy-levels within the shell - 
the higher the energy-level the greater the distance of the orbit 
from the nucleus. 

To complete the picture, we have to assume that such orbital 
electrons are only capable of emitting or absorbing energy when 




174 Introducing Science 

they jump from one energy-level to another, and at no other time. 
This is in accord with the Quantum Theory, which as we have 
seen postulates that energy is emitted, on the atomic scale, in 
short bursts. When an electron jumps inwards towards the 
nucleus, it loses energy which is emitted as a quantum of light, 
called a photon. Conversely, if a quantum of energy is absorbed 
by the atom (and this can only happen if it is exactly the right 
size), then the electron jumps outwards from the nucleus, still 
remaining within the correct shell. In the case of the hydrogen 
atom, then, we can imagine three such energy-levels or possible 
orbits for the sole electron (Figure 42) to account for the two 



emission of green light 



-f- emission of red light 



Fig. 42 

predominant visible emissions which we have mentioned. In fact, 
of course, the position is very much more complicated than this 
as we have only taken into account the most predominant of the 
visible emission lines. 

This picture of possible orbits corresponding to energy-levels 
is called the Bohr atom, after its initiator, and it provides in many 
respects an adequate working model, being particularly well 
suited to the depiction of the emission of energy in quanta. It 
should be noted that Bohr's Theory has been amplified mathe- 
matically to take into account the fact that electron orbits can be 
elliptical and that the electrons themselves are capable of spinning 
on their own axis, 

However, the Bohr atom, even in its modified form, still relies 
on the electron as a particle, and for reasons which we shall now 
outline, it cannot be accepted as an actual representation of fact. 
It is not correct to assume that if a sufficiently powerful micro- 
scope were available we should be able to watch electrons 
jumping from one orbit to another. The main reason for this 



Radiant Energy 175 

assertion is that the actual act of observation would alter the 
process being observed, as we shall see from the following 
considerations. 

The Uncertainty Principle 

It has been proved that the energy of a light quantum, or photon, 
which would be required to 'illuminate' an electron, so that it 
could be observed, would alter the position of the electron. The 
electron and the photon may be visualized in this sense as two 
colliding billiard balls - after collision both balls alter their 
course to an extent which depends on the energy of motion con- 
tained by each of them before collision. 

This is the basis of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, which 
states that the position and the velocity of an electron cannot 
both be known exactly - the magnitude of the error, if both these 
measurements were to be made simultaneously, would be very 
great, but it can be calculated. This dilemma is not an experi- 
mental difficulty; it is fundamental and cannot be resolved. The 
position and velocity of the ultimate particles of nature cannot be 
defined without uncertainty. 

This being the case, it is perhaps illogical to expect that we 
should be able to visualize accurately something that nature pre- 
cludes us from seeing accurately. Therefore the Bohr atom may 
be accepted as a useful method of understanding some aspects of 
the subject, but it must not be regarded as a true description of 
the inner workings of an atom, 

Interference 

In order to gain a more fundamental understanding of the be- 
haviour of electrons within the atom, it is necessary to examine 
the way in which they behave as waves, as opposed to particles. 
In order to do so, reference must be made to the phenomenon of 
interference which is exhibited by light-waves. 

If a ray of light from a source is allowed to fall on a sheet of 
paper in which a small slit has been made (A in Figure 43), and if 
the beam of light which emerges from this slit is allowed to fall 
upon a second sheet of paper which contains two small holes (B 
and Q so that A is equidistant from B and C, then the waves of 



176 



Introducing Science 




(\AWAAAA 



rings of brightness 
*i 



WWVYAAJ 



sheet 1 




sheet 2 



Fig. 43 



darkness 



light arriving at B and C will be exactly in phase (that is to say 
that the crests of the waves will arrive at B and C at the same 
instant). 

Now, if the beams which emerge from the holes B and C are 
allowed to fall on a third sheet of paper, a characteristic pattern 
will be observed on this third sheet which typifies all wave motion. 
Where the two circles of light falling on the third sheet of paper 
overlap there will be alternate concentric rings of darkness and 
brightness which are called interference rings. The dark circles 
occur where the waves of light from the two holes B and C 
arrive on sheet 3 out of phase with each other, thus cancelling 
each other out, as in Figure 44. This cancelling effect of two 



light- 
waves 



i 



^--darkness 



Fig. 44 



Radiant Energy 111 

waves out of phase with each other can be visualized by thinking 
of a cork floating on a pool of water. A wave coining from one 
direction will lift the cork to the height of its crest as it passes. 
If, however, a wave of equal amplitude comes from the opposite 
direction so that its trough arrives at the cork at exactly the same 
instant as the crest of the first wave, the cork will remain station- 
ary as the effect of the two waves cancel each other out. In 
exactly the same way, two light-waves arriving at a point will, if 
they are out of phase, result in darkness. Similarly the bright 
circles in the interference patterns occur where the waves arrive 
in phase with each other, and so their effect is doubled. 

These interference experiments prove conclusively that light is 
associated with a wave-motion, for if it consisted only of particles 
(photons), it would be impossible to explain how two particles 
arriving at the same point could cancel each other out - they 
could only reinforce each other, and interference patterns would 
not occur. On the other hand, however, when we come to examine 
the photo-electric effect, it will become evident that light has 
properties that can only be explained in terms of particles. Thus 
light (and the other short-wave electromagnetic radiations) 
present us with the same duality as electrons. Both are associated 
partly with waves of energy (emitted in short bursts according to 
the Quantum Theory) and partly with particles. We shall refer to 
the resolution of this paradox when we say something about wave 
mechanics. 

As far as electrons are concerned, it has been shown experi- 
mentally that they behave in exactly the same manner as light 
with regard to interference, and it must therefore be concluded 
that a beam of electrons possesses at least one characteristic of a 
wave-motion. That electrons do in fact possess wave properties is 
now well established, and it has been found that the length of the 
associated wave is dependent upon the velocity with which the 
electron is moving - the faster it moves, the shorter its associated 
wave-length. To be precise, the actual wave-length (A) is obtained 
by dividing Planck's constant (h) by the product of the mass (772) 
and th velocity of the electron (v), i.e. : 



mv 



178 Introducing Science 

Wave Mechanics 

The fact that electrons exhibit the properties of both waves and 
particles has led to the development of a method of expressing 
this behaviour mathematically which is called wave mechanics. 
Being highly mathematical this treatment does not easily lend 
itself to descriptive presentation. However, it is possible to inter- 
pret the wave-mechanics equations for an electron as expressing 
the probability that an electron, visualized as a particle, will exist 
at a certain point in the path of a wave. 

The word 'probability' is most important in this context, 
because according to wave mechanics all the fundamental pro- 
cesses of nature are controlled by probabilities, rather than rigid 
and inflexible laws. Nothing in the universe is absolutely certain to 
happen: if it is very likely it has a high probability, if it is very 
unlikely it has a low probability. 

Referred to electrons within the atom, this treatment yields an 
atomic nucleus, surrounded by a 'cloud of probability' that 
electrons will exist at certain positions at certain instants of time. 
These probable positions replace the unnaturally precise positions 
depicted in the Bohr atom. The greater lack of precision inherent 
in the wave-mechanical interpretation is accounted for by the 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. 

The dual nature of light is similarly explained by wave mech- 
anics - photons and waves are related by probabilities much in 
the same way as electrons and waves. 

The Electron Microscope 

It is worth noting in passing that the wave characteristics of a 
beam of electrons have been put to a most beneficial use in the 
electron microscope. Until the invention of this instrument, just 
before the Second World War, the magnification obtainable with 
a microscope was limited by the wavelength of visible light. This 
is because two points on a microscopic specimen cannot be 
distinguished from each other if they are not at least as far apart 
as half the wave-length of the light used to illuminate them. 

By using a beam of electrons instead of light as the illuminant, 
virtually any wave-length can be used by controlling the velocity 



Radiant Energy 179 

of the electrons electrically. (The wave-length of a beam of 
electrons, it will be remembered, is inversely proportional to their 
velocity - that is, the greater the velocity, the shorter the associ- 
ated wave-length.) Thus, by subjecting a beam of electrons to a 
potential of 10,000 volts a wave-length of about 10~ 9 cm. is ob- 
tained, compared to visible wave-lengths of the order of 
5 x 10~ 5 cm. Glass lenses cannot be used with electron micro- 
scopes; instead a system of magnetic lenses has been developed, 
and the resulting image is photographed on a special type of 
photographic plate. With the tremendous magnifications possible 
with this instrument, objects as small as individual viruses can 
now be clearly photographed and observed. 

Emission Spectra 

From the foregoing paragraphs we are led to conclude that, 
although the positions of the orbital electrons as particles cannot 
be precisely defined, they can be visualized as existing at certain 
points in the path of a wave, and, while they do not emit radiation 
continuously, they do so when they jump from a high energy 
level to a lower one. 

When these jumps take place a photon of light energy is 
emitted ; the size of the photon, and therefore the frequency of the 
associated wave, depends upon the magnitude of the jump and 
hence upon the 'probable' arrangement of the electrons within 
the atom. As the atoms of the different chemical elements contain 
different numbers and groupings of electrons, it is not surprising 
that the frequencies at which light is emitted differ from one 
element to another. 

We have seen that the emission of light from incandescent 
hydrogen when passed through a prism produces a series of lines 
in place of the continuous visible spectrum. The arrangement of 
these lines is called the emission line spectrum of hydrogen. All 
the other elements, when heated to incandescence in the gaseous 
state, also produce characteristic emission line spectra, and as 
the position and strength of these lines differ from element to 
element, any element can be identified by its emission line 
spectrum. For example, sodium vapour produces a very strong 



180 Introducing Science 

and persistent line of wave-length 5-9 x 10~ 5 cm. ;* as this is the 
frequency of yellow light, the addition of common salt (sodium 
chloride) to a flame will colour it bright yellow. Similarly, 
strontium has a strong line in the red region of the visible 
spectrum and will colour a flame bright red. 

Gas molecules also produce characteristic spectral lines, but, 
owing to the complications resulting from the presence of two or 
more atoms in the molecule, the lines are much more closely 
packed together and are known as band spectra. 

Visual line and band spectra are only produced by atoms and 
molecules in the gaseous state, because in the liquid or solid states 
the atoms and molecules are so near to each other that the 
individual radiations are interfered with and superimposed upon 
one another so that a continuous spectrum is produced. 

This principle can be illustrated by supplying heat energy to a 
solid piece of metal (or any other material which does not vaporize 
at too low a temperature). Up to a temperature of about 550C 
the radiation will all be in the infra-red, and hence the metal will 
not alter its appearance although it will be radiating heat. Above 
550C, the metal will begin to glow with a red light (red heat) 
which will become lighter and lighter as the temperature is raised, 
until about 1,300C is reached. At this temperature the metal 
will glow with white light (white heat), because all the colours 
of the visible spectrum are being emitted in approximately the 
correct proportions for white light. This, of course, is how white 
light is obtained from electric-light bulbs - a metal filament is 
heated to white heat by an electric current. At still higher 
temperatures the metal would take on a bluish tinge owing to the 
predominance of the high-frequency violet light, although most 
metals vaporize at the temperature corresponding to blue light 
(and as vapours they emit line spectra). 

In these examples we have illustrated the emission of light as a 
result of energy being supplied to matter in the form of heat, but 
it must also be mentioned that gases can be provoked to emit 
radiant energy by bombarding the atoms and molecules of which 
they consist with a stream of electrons. For example, a neon-tube 

* Sodium actually produces two lines, so close together that a simple 
instrument shows them as one* 



Radiant Energy 181 

light is simply a tube of glass filled with the inert gas neon, 
through which a current of electrons is caused to flow. If the 
voltage is correctly adjusted to give the electrons the required 
amount of energy to knock the orbital electrons of the neon 
atoms into a lower energy level, the tube will emit its character- 
istic red light. 

Absorption Spectra 

If white light is passed through a pure gas, and then through a 
prism, it will be found that the continuous spectrum normally 
produced by white light is interrupted by dark lines at exactly the 
positions occupied by the coloured lines of the emission spectrum 
of that gas. For example, if the gas consists of sodium vapour, the 
continuous spectrum will have, amongst others, a black line in the 
yellow region corresponding to a wave-length of 5-9 x 10~ 5 cm. 
Such dark lines are called absorption line spectra, and are due to 
the selective absorption, by the atoms of the gas, of radiations 
of the same frequency as they are capable of emitting. The fact 
that a gas can only absorb energy at those frequencies which it is 
capable of emitting is analogous to the phenomenon of resonance 
which we have mentioned in connexion with sound-waves and 
electrical circuits. 

The atoms and molecules of a solid, however, are too tightly 
packed to be able to be selective about the frequencies at which 
they will resonate, just as they are unable to be selective about 
the frequencies which they emit. Solids, therefore, absorb light of 
most frequencies, which accounts for the fact that they are 
usually opaque. Some solids, on the other hand, are transparent 
because they are without the ability of resonating in the visible 
range of frequencies, and they are therefore incapable of absorb- 
ing light. As we have seen earlier, the colour of an opaque solid 
or liquid is determined by the wave-lengths it is incapable of 
absorbing, that is, by the wave-lengths it reflects. 

Absorption spectra present us with a method of discovering 
which of the elements exist in the sun and the stars. The interior 
of the sun, it will be recalled, is a glowing mass of matter radiating 
white light which must pass through the surface and atmosphere 
of the sun before reaching the earth. Thus, if sunlight is passed 



182 Introducing Science 

through a prism, dark lines will appear in the continuous 
spectrum so obtained, and from the position and strength of these 
lines it is possible to tell which of the elements are present on the 
surface and in the atmosphere of the sun. This method can also 
be applied to light from the stars, and from the results obtained 
it has been possible to conclude that the rest of the visible 
universe is composed of the same ninety-two elements with which 
we are familiar on earth. The method of analysing emission and 
absorption spectra is known as spectroscopy, and the instrument 
used, containing the prism or other suitable device, is called a 
spectroscope. 

The Red Shift 

In addition to giving information concerning the constitution of 
the stars, spectroscopy can also provide certain information con- 
cerning their motions. 

The movement of a star through space, relative to the earth, 
can be observed through a telescope provided that the star is not 
moving either directly towards, or away from, the earth. Clearly, 
taking into account the enormous distances concerned, looking 
at a star through a telescope will not disclose if it is moving 
directly towards or away from the earth, nor will it disclose any 
component which the star's movement may have in these 
directions. This information can, however, be obtained from the 
star's spectrum in the following manner* 

Consider a star which is emitting light of a particular fre- 
quency - say yellow light. We know that the colour of light is 
determined by its frequency, that is, in this case, by the number 
of waves per second arriving in the spectroscope. Now, if the 
spectroscope is travelling towards the star, or the star towards 
the spectroscope, the number of waves per second which arrive 
will obviously be increased; consequently the apparent frequency 
of the light will be increased and the colour of the light will be 
shifted towards the violet (high frequency) end of the spectrum. 
Conversely, if the star is receding from the earth, the colour of the 
visible radiation which it emits will be shifted towards the red end 
of the spectrum. By measuring the extent of these shifts, the velo- 
city of the star, towards or away from the earth, can be calculated. 



Radiant Energy 1 S3 

It is evidence of this red shift that has led astronomers to con- 
clude that the universe is expanding, that is, that its components 
are flying apart. (See page 224.) 

The Photo-electric Effect 

We have shown that, as a result of the interference effect, light 
must have wave properties; we have also mentioned that these 
waves are emitted in quanta, or bursts of energy, called photons 
which can in some contexts be regarded as particles. 

Just as electrons appear to be particles with certain wave 
properties, so light appears to be a wave with some particle 
properties. That the ultimate components of matter (electrons) 
and the ultimate components of energy (photons) should have 
similar dual natures is not surprising bearing in mind the close 
relationship which exists between matter and energy. We shall 
say more about this later; for the present we must refer to the 
corpuscular (particle-like) properties exhibited by photons in the 
photo-electric effect. 

If a ray of light is allowed to fall on a clean metal surface (in 
a vacuum for the best results) the energy of the light will be 
absorbed by the free electrons in the metal, some of which will 
thereby acquire sufficient energy to escape from the surface of the 
metal. It has been found that the number of electrons to escape 
depends upon the strength of the light - that is upon the number 
of photons; but the speed of the escaping electrons (i.e., their 
energy) depends upon the size of the photons, that is upon the 
frequency of the incident light. (It will be remembered that the 
size of a photon is equal to the frequency of the radiation it 
embodies multiplied by Planck's constant.) 

Thus a very weak source of violet light will cause the emission 
of faster electrons by the photo-electric effect than will a very 
strong source of red light. Purely on a wave basis this state of 
affairs would be incomprehensible; it can only be explained if the 
light is visualized as being composed of particles the size of which 
is a measure of the energy they contain in accordance with the 
Quantum Theory. In fact, owing to its low frequency, red light 
consists of photons which are insufficiently energetic to cause a 
photo-electric effect with most metals, but violet light frees 



184 Introducing Science 

electrons from nearly all metals. Ultra-violet and X-radiations 
produce very fast electrons because their photons contain more 
energy than visible light. 

The photo-electric effect is made use of very widely in the 
photo-electric cell. This is somewhat similar to the electronic valve 
which we have already described (see page 158), but, in the photo- 
cell the cathode is provoked into electron emission by illumina- 
tion, not by heating. The electrons so produced travel directly to 
the anode without the intermediary of a grid, and create a 
current which will fluctuate in accordance with the strength of the 
illumination falling upon the cathode. 

This principle is often used in the production of sound in 
cinematograph projectors. Light from a powerful lamp is passed 
through the sound-track on the film, and the fluctuating illumina- 
tion produced by the shadows of the sound-track is allowed to 
fall on a photocell, the output of which is fed into an amplifier 
and loudspeakers. In this way the shadows on the sound-track 
are converted into sound. 

ULTRA-VIOLET RADIATION 

In discussing the emission of electromagnetic radiation by atoms, 
we have so far only mentioned those that have too low a frequency 
to be visible (i.e., infra-red radiations) and those that are visible 
(i.e., light). However, atoms also emit radiations that have too 
great a frequency to be visible; these are called, in order of 
increasing frequency, ultra-violet radiation., X-radiation, and y- 
radiation. In this section we shall deal with ultra-violet radiation 
and in the subsequent section we shall say something about X- 
and y-radiations. 

Ultra-violet radiations, then, are electromagnetic radiations 
which have wave-lengths between 4 x 10~ 5 cm. and 3 x 10~ 6 cm., 
and which are emitted by atoms in the same way as light. In 
general their properties are very similar to those of light, with the 
notable exception that the retina of the human eye is not sensitive 
to them. 

All the elements of the Periodic Table produce their own 
characteristic spectral lines in the ultra-violet frequency range, 
just as they produce characteristic lines in the visible waveband, 



Radiant Energy 185 

and these lines can be recorded, by a spectroscope, on a photo- 
graphic plate. For although ultra-violet radiations cannot be 
seen, they can be recorded photographically as they have the 
same effect on a photographic emulsion as light. 

The emissions from the sun include ultra-violet radiations of 
most wave-lengths as well as the visible frequencies, although 
some of the shorter wave-lengths are strongly absorbed by the 
earth's atmosphere and therefore do not reach us on the earth's 
surface. In fact, the shorter the wave-length of ultra-violet radia- 
tions, the greater their absorption by the atmosphere, until a 
wave-length of about 3 x 10~ 6 cm. is reached when the pene- 
trating power of the radiations begins to increase. However, 
radiations of shorter wave-length than this are the subject of the 
next section, as they are called X-rays. 

The ultra-violet component of sunlight is of interest to us for 
three principal reasons: firstly, it causes sun tan; secondly, it 
ionizes the upper atmosphere so that the reflection of sky waves 
in radio broadcasting can be achieved; and thirdly, certain re- 
actions can only take place in the presence of ultra-violet radia- 
tion - one such reaction leads to the formation of vitamin D 
without which young mammals (including children) develop 
rickets. 

The sun tan is produced by ultra-violet radiation of a narrow 
band of wave-lengths around 3 x 10~ 5 cm. but, as radiations in 
this waveband are absorbed by the atmosphere to a certain 
extent, winter sunshine at sea-level causes hardly any tan as the 
sun's rays have to pass through a greater thickness of atmosphere 
than they do in the summer. At sea-level in the summer or on 
high mountains in the winter the thickness of atmosphere is not 
sufficient to absorb all the ultra-violet radiations of this frequency 
and therefore sun tan results. We have already mentioned the 
useful effect that ultra-violet radiations cause in the ionosphere 
(p. 159), and we shall have more to say on ionization caused by 
electromagnetic radiations in the next section. 

X-RADIATION AND y-RADIATION 

X-rays and y-rays have very similar properties: in fact, y-rays are 
only X-rays of particularly short wave-length and penetrating 



186 Introducing Science 

power. The distinction between these two radiations concerns 
their origin and generation rather than their properties, for, while 
X-rays are emitted by the inner orbital electrons of atoms, y-rays 
are emitted by their nuclei. In Chapter 2 we said that y-rays are 
emitted by the naturally radioactive atoms when they break 
down, with the emanation of a- or/?-particles: we shall discuss this 
aspect of nuclear physics in greater detail in Chapter 1 1 ; for the 
present we must say something more about the emission of 
X-rays. 

The Emission of X-rays 

In the previous sections we have shown how visible and ultra- 
violet radiations are produced when outer electrons of an atom 
jump from one energy-level to a lower one. However, X-rays 
being of wave-lengths 3 x 10~ 6 cm. to 3 x 10~ 9 cm. are very 
considerably more energetic than optical radiations, and are 
therefore concerned with the inner orbital electrons. This is 
because the inner electrons, particularly of the heavier elements, 
are held in their orbits round the nucleus with greater binding 
energy than the outer electrons ; it is therefore to be expected that, 
when these inner electrons jump from one energy-level to a lower 
one, the quanta emitted will be of greater energy than those 
emitted by the outer electrons. Indeed, the X-ray spectra emitted 
by the various atoms of the elements have yielded a considerable 
amount of information concerning the arrangement and con- 
figuration of the inner electrons of atoms. 

The fact that X-rays are associated with energy levels of the 
inner electrons accounts for the fact that atoms produce spectral 
lines in the X-ray waveband even when they are combined in 
molecules, or are in the solid state. As chemical combination and 
physical state depends on the behaviour of the outer electrons, 
inner electrons and the X-radiations which they emit are un- 
influenced by such matters. The inner electrons of an atom are 
provoked into X-ray emission by bombarding the atom with a 
beam of fast-moving electrons; the faster the electrons in the 
beam, the deeper into the atom they penetrate and therefore the 
higher the frequency of the emitted X-rays. 

A typical source of X-rays for medical purposes consists of an 



Radiant Energy 187 

evacuated glass tube containing a hot wire filament which pro- 
duces the beam of electrons (F in Figure 45). These electrons 
bombard a small disk of a heavy metal such as platinum (D in 
the figure), the atoms of which contain inner electrons bound to 
the nucleus with high energy. A very high voltage is applied to 
this disk, which forms part of a massive copper anode (A), and 
the heated filament (F) is suspended in a specially shaped cathode 
which produces a narrow beam of electrons. The general arrange- 
ment is similar to that of the electronic valve which has already 
been described, but, in this case, the effect of a high-energy stream 
of electrons on the atoms of platinum is to disorganize their inner 
electrons so that they fall to a lower energy-level, giving off 
photons of X-radiation in the process. 





fl] 


electron beam 




f~ 




j 


^ 


J 


p 


* X 


i 


c 


>.v. 


"T\ 


-' 


4 \ 


I 

1 


// "^"^ 


J 


c 


1 
J 

1 
J 

F 


n 

X-rays ^ D A 
Fig. 45 





Owing to their high penetrating power, these X-rays will pass 
through matter as long as it is not too dense; the use of X-rays 
for medical diagnosis depends on the fact that they are more 
strongly absorbed by bone than by flesh. Thus, if an X-ray tube 
is placed above a limb and a photographic plate is placed 
beneath it, a shadow of the bone will be formed on the plate. 
This procedure can be used to discover whether a bone is 
fractured or not. In a similar manner X-rays can be used to 
examine the outline of a stomach, or other internal organ, by 
giving the patient a dose of a liquid (such as a 'barium meal') 
which is opaque to X-rays (i.e., a liquid which absorbs X-rays). 



188 Introducing Science 

Ionizing Radiation 

We must now say something about the ionization produced by 

X- and y-radiations. 

In the section on the photo-electric effect it was stated that a 
stream of photons of the comparatively low energy associated 
with visible light could liberate from the surface of a metal its 
loosely bonded free electrons. Photons of X- and y-rays (and to 
a lesser extent ultra-violet rays) can, on account of their higher 
energy, knock outer electrons of an atom from their orbits thus 
creating positively charged ions (see page 34). For this reason 
X- and y-radiations (and high-frequency ultra-violet radiations) 
are known as ionizing radiations. For example, if a water molecule 
is subjected to X-radiation it will ionize thus: 

X-ray 
H 2 > H 2 0+ + e- 

The liberated electron will cause further ionizations, but it will 
eventually lose most of its energy and will be finally collected by 
another water molecule forming a negative ion: 

e~ + H 2 O->H 2 O- 

In general, then, X- and y-radiations produce free electrons and 
ions in the material which they irradiate, and the free electrons 
will in turn cause further ionizations. In fact, the number of 
ionizations caused by the free electrons is several thousand times 
greater than the number of ionizations resulting from the X- and 
y-radiations themselves. 

The chemical effect of ionizing radiations is due to the ex- 
ceptional reactivity of the ions which, as we have seen, are formed 
to a large extent by the electrons liberated by the radiation. It is 
therefore to be expected that /?-rays, which consist of a stream of 
electrons, would also behave as an ionizing radiation, and such 
is, in fact, the case. But X- and y-radiations are much more 
penetrating, energy for energy, than -rays, and therefore they 
produce ionization much deeper into the body of the material 
irradiated by them than /?-rays. 

In passing it should be noted that some photons will only have 
sufficient energy (for example light and ultra-violet rays) to raise 



Radiant Energy 189 

the energy level of an orbital electron without being able to de- 
tach it from the nucleus. Atoms or molecules containing these 
high-energy electrons are said to be 'excited*, and like ions they 
are exceptionally reactive chemically. This accounts for the fact 
that some reactions will only take place in the presence of light 
or ultra-violet radiation. 

Because of the high degree of chemical reactivity which they 
produce, ionizing radiations are extremely dangerous to living 
organisms, interfering with the functioning of their cells in a 
manner which is not yet fully understood. Cells can be affected 
in three ways: 

1. They can be disorganized so that their function is upset. 

2. They can be disorganized so that their reproductive 
mechanism is disturbed (mutations, etc.). 

3. They can be disorganized to such an extent that they are 
killed. 

In this connexion, it is well known that X- and y-rays can either 
cause or cure cancer, depending on the way in which they are 
administered. They cause cancer by destroying or interfering with 
some part of the reproductive mechanism of cells so that they 
proliferate in an uncontrolled manner. They can also be used to 
cure cancer by killing the malignant cells which are often more 
susceptible to ionizing radiations than are the healthy cells of 
the surrounding tissue. Ionizing radiations can also cure cancer 
by putting the reproductive mechanism of the malignant cells 
out of action; in such cases the malignant growth does not dis- 
appear for some time, although it will have been rendered 
harmless. 

A particular danger of ionizing radiation to life, in even 
relatively small doses, is that it can cause mutation of genes (see 
Chapter 6), and in such cases it is not the irradiated organism 
which suffers but its progeny. It must be remembered, however, 
that the whole course of evolution has depended upon such muta- 
tions (partly as a result of natural background radiation), 
although in the case of highly developed creatures such as man 
they are now almost always degenerative. As the effect of ionizing 
radiation in this respect may be cumulative, the greatest possible 



190 Introducing Science 

care has to be taken in their use for diagnostic and other purposes. 
In recent years, since these properties of ionizing radiations have 
been better understood, the use of X-ray machines, in shoe-shops 
for example, has been discouraged. 

The greatest potentially dangerous source of ionizing radiations 
is nuclear weapons. As we shall see in Chapter 11 the explosion 
of a nuclear bomb is accompanied by a prolific emanation of 
y-rays, which constitute an additional hazard to the heat radia- 
tion and the blast (shock-waves) associated with other explosives. 
The effect on human beings of exposure to y-radiations from 
nuclear explosions depends on their distance from the explosion. 
If they are close enough they will be killed as a result of the death 
of a sufficient number of cells in vital organs (that is if the heat 
or the blast has not already killed them). Those who survive are 
very liable to develop malignant diseases, while those who think 
they have escaped may have, in fact, suffered genetic damage 
which may appear as malformation or deficiency of one kind or 
another in their offspring, 

It is not possible, therefore, to exaggerate the appalling conse- 
quences that a nuclear war would involve, nor should the people 
of the world be allowed to forget that each nuclear bomb that is 
tested adds to the background of ionizing radiation and may well 
be the cause of at least some deleterious change to human genetic 
material somewhere, 

It must be added that, while X- and y-radiations are potentially 
extremely dangerous to mankind, they are also of great value in 
medicine, both diagnostically and therapeutically. It is to be 
hoped, therefore, that scientists all over the world will be en- 
couraged to devote their energies exclusively to the development 
of their beneficial uses. 



COSMIC RADIATION 

At about the beginning of this century it was found that air, 
sealed in a closed vessel, was ionized to a small extent, and that 
the degree of ionization could be reduced by screening the vessel 
with lead sheeting. It was therefore concluded that the cause of 
the ionization was coming from outside the vessel, and it was 



Radiant Energy 191 

assumed that the ionizing radiation responsible emanated from 
the small quantity of natural radioactive elements that are found 
in the earth's crust. 

This assumption, however, proved to be only part of the 
answer, for it was later found, as a result of experiments with 
high-altitude balloons, that the intensity of the ionizing radiation 
fell off as the height above the surface of the earth increased, 
but that after a certain distance had been travelled it began 
steadily to increase again. It was therefore clear that some 
ionizing radiations were coming into the earth's atmosphere from 
outer space, and for this reason they were called cosmic rays. 

The origin of these rays is still not known, but it appears likely 
that at least a small portion emanate from the sun, as solar 
disturbances are accompanied by a small increase in cosmic radia- 
tion. On the other hand it is equally clear that the bulk of the 
radiation does not come from the sun, as it is almost as strong at 
night as it is in the day. In fact it is now accepted that most of the 
cosmic radiation arriving on the earth comes from outside the 
Solar System, and that the primary radiation, that is the radiation 
as it arrives from space before it has interacted with the atoms of 
the earth's atmosphere, consists of atomic nuclei, most of which 
are protons but some of which are heavier particles. 

The energy of these particles when they arrive in the earth's 
atmosphere is extremely great, and therefore the frequencies 
associated with them are correspondingly high - some being as 
high as about 10 24 cycles per second, far higher than even y-rays. 
In view of this enormous energy it is not surprising to discover 
that cosmic radiations interact with the atoms of the atmosphere, 
and that some of the interactions are with the nuclei of the atoms. 
Indeed, cosmic rays have been extremely useful to scientists as 
these interactions have been responsible for most of our know- 
ledge of the structure and components of the atomic nucleus, 
several new subatomic particles having been discovered as a 
result of cosmic-ray research. 

Positive electrons, called positrons, were discovered in this 
way. These positrons have the same mass as the electron and 
their charge, though equal in magnitude, is opposite in sense (i.e., 
they are positively charged). Positrons are formed together with 



192 Introducing Science 

electrons as a result of the materialization of energy during the 

following sequence of transformations. 

If a primary cosmic proton collides with an orbital electron of 
an atmospheric atom, it will impart to it a great part of its 
enormous energy. As a result of this acquisition of energy the 
electron will travel at a velocity very close to the velocity of light, 
and consequently will have the ability of passing right through the 
orbital electrons of other atmospheric atoms, so that in some 
cases such an electron will strike a nucleus. When this happens 
a photon of extremely high-energy y-radiation will be produced 
which can,, in certain circumstances, materialize into an electron 
pair (one electron and one positron) : y -> e~ + e+. 

This is an example of the direct creation of matter from energy. 
However, we have an example of the reverse process when the 
positron so formed collides with another electron - for then both 
particles disappear in a photon of y-radiation, but this will be a 
less energetic photon, of course, than the photon from which the 
electron pair was formed. Further subatomic particles called 
mesons have also been discovered as a result of cosmic-ray 
investigations, but these particles will be discussed in greater 
detail in Chapter 1L 

It should be added that although cosmic rays are very highly 
energetic, as atomic figures go, they do not arrive on the earth in 
very great numbers - only a few thousand arrive on an area of 
the atmosphere the size of this page in one hour. A further point 
is that, despite the fact that many of the cosmic particles are 
subject to interactions with the atoms of the atmosphere, some 
manage to penetrate through to the earth's surface where they 
add to the natural background of ionizing radiation. 

Radio-carbon Dating 

An interesting consequence of cosmic radiation is the recently 
devised method of dating ancient specimens of wood and other 
organic materials that archaeologists have dug out of the remains 
of past civilizations. 

The impact of cosmic particles on the nitrogen atoms of the 
atmosphere causes some of them to transform into radioactive 
carbon atoms of atomic weight 14. We shall say more about these 



Radiant Energy 193 

artificial radioactive isotopes in Chapter 1 1, but here we may say 
that this particular reaction is provoked by the impact on a 
nitrogen atom of a neutron (either a primary cosmic particle or 
the result of a collision between a primary particle and another 
atom). 

The neutron (written nj) becomes embedded in the nitrogen 
atom (N^ 4 ) which as a result is unstable and ejects a proton (Hi), 
thus forming a nucleus which contains only six protons - this is 
therefore a carbon nucleus (C$ 4 ) with an unusually high number 
of neutrons (eight instead of the usual six). This reaction may be 
written thus: nj -f N^* ->Q 4 -f Hi. The subscripts to these 
symbols refer to the nuclear charge or atomic number (i.e., the 
number of protons in the nucleus), while the superscripts refer to 
the number of nucleons (i.e., protons plus neutrons) in the 
nucleus. It will be seen that the above equation balances; that is 
both sides contain the same number of protons and the same 
number of neutrons. 

Because the carbon-14 atoms formed have an unusually high 
number of neutrons, they are radioactive and decay with the 
emission of electrons QS-rays). However, they are relatively stable 
compared with some radioactive elements, having a half-life (see 
page 39) of between five and six thousand years. These radio- 
active isotopes of carbon, therefore, have plenty of time in which 
to combine with atmospheric oxygen (in the same way as ordinary 
carbon atoms), to form carbon dioxide (CO^, and some of them 
will in due course be taken up by plants during photosynthesis 
(see page 105). Thus every tree will contain a certain number of 
radioactive carbon-14 atoms ; not many, of course, but enough to 
make their presence known by the very sensitive methods of 
determining radioactivity (Geiger-Muller counters, etc.). 

When a tree is cut down, it will cease to acquire further radio- 
carbon atoms and, as the radio-carbon atoms which it acquired 
during its lifetime decay, the number of these atoms present in 
dead wood will decrease with the passage of time. Therefore, by 
comparing the intensity of the radioactivity of a piece of modern 
wood with that of a piece of ancient wood of unknown age, the 
date of the latter can be calculated. This calculation must assume 
that the intensity of cosmic radiation over the last few thousand 

7 



194 Introducing Science 

years (a very short period of time compared to the life of the 
earth) has remained approximately constant. This assumption has 
been justified by checking the radioactivity of ancient wood 
specimens of known age from such sources as the tombs of the 
Pharaohs. In general, this ingenious method has been found to 
give reliable datings. 

SUMMARY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATIONS 

We have now examined briefly the properties and mode of 
emission of the various electromagnetic radiations. These results 
are summarized in Table 6. 

THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT 

During the course of our examination of electromagnetic radia- 
tions we have had occasion to mention that all such radiations, 
including light, travel through empty space at the same velocity 
of about 186,000 miles per second. As this speed is of the greatest 
importance in the universe it will now be necessary to say some- 
thing about it. Firstly, it is an experimentally observed fact that 
the velocity of light is absolute, that is to say, it is not relative to 
the velocity through space of the measurer. To understand this 
statement let us consider the following examples. 

Imagine two cars (Figure 46) travelling in the same direction 



-> 30 miles per hour 



* 50 miles per hour 



Fig. 46 

along a road, one (A) at say 30 miles per hour, the other (B) at 
say 50 miles per hour. To an observer travelling in car A with an 
instrument for measuring the speed of remote bodies (about which 
we will say more later), car B would appear to be overtaking at a 
speed of 20 miles per hour. We say, in fact, that the speed of car 
B is 20 miles per hour relative to car A, although it is 50 miles per 



Radiant Energy 
Table 6 



195 



Name of 
radiation 


Mode of emission 


Characteristic property 
or use 


Audio 

frequencies 


Vibration of an electric or 
magnetic field by mech- 
anical means 


Transmission of sound 
by telephony 


Radio 
frequencies 


Oscillations of a current of 
electrons in a specially 
designed circuit 


Transmission of modu- 
lated radio waves 


Infra-red 
frequencies 


Vibration or rotation of 
whole atoms or molecules 


Transmission of radiant 
heat 


Visible 

frequencies 


Emission due to outer orbi- 
tal electrons jumping from 
one energy level to a lower 
energy level 


Visible light, light-sensi- 
tive reactions 


Ultra-violet 
frequencies 


Production of sun tan; 
ionization of upper 
atmosphere 



X-rays Emission due to inner orbi- 

tal electrons jumping from 
one energy level to a lower 
energy level 

y-rays Emission due to intra- 

nuclear disturbances 



Penetration of matter; 
medical diagnosis and 
radiotherapy ; genetic 
mutation, etc. 



Cosmic Arrival of high energy sub- 

radiation atomic particles from 

outer space 



Investigations of atomic 
nuclei; radioactive 
carbon dating 



hour relative to the earth. It must not be forgotten, however, that 
the earth is rotating on its axis and also revolving in its orbit 
about the sun; furthermore, the solar system is in motion relative 
to the other stars within our galaxy, and the whole galaxy is in 
motion relative to other galaxies. Therefore the motions of the 
two cars in space are really very much more complex than they 
at first appear. In general, then, it will be seen that in order to 
specify the velocity of a body it is necessary to state to which 
other bodies this velocity is relative. 



196 Introducing Science 

The velocity of light, however, is not subject to this reservation; 
it is not relative to any other motion in the universe, it is absolute. 
This can be further illustrated by a second example, but in this 
case it will be necessary to speed up one of the cars beyond the 
present limits of practical possibility. 

Imagine, then, that car A is travelling at, say, 90 per cent of 
the velocity of light (about 167,000 miles per second), and that 
car B is stationary. If the driver of car B switches on his head- 
lamp, just as car A passes him, the beam of light so produced will 
overtake car A because light travels at 186,000 miles per second 
(i.e., faster than car A). (Figure 47.) If the observer in car A uses 



167,000 miles per second 



-> 186,000 miles per second 



at rest beam of light 

Fig. 47 

his speed-measuring instrument to measure the speed at which 
the beam of light is passing him he will find that it is not 
186,000 - 167,000 = 19,000 miles per second, but the full velo- 
city of light, namely 186,000 miles per second, i.e., the velocity 
of light is absolute and is not relative to the velocity of the 
observer. 

This result appears to be quite contrary to our everyday 
experiences and seems at first to be altogether unintelligible, 
although if we were capable of moving about at these enormous 
speeds we should presumably be conditioned to reacting in a 
different way to such matters. 

In fact, the explanation of this remarkable phenomenon is 
supplied by Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity, and is quite 
simple to understand in principle if one divests oneself of the 
erroneous conception of space and time with which we have 
become familiar in our everyday lives. 

THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 
Having learnt what is meant by saying that the velocity of light 
is absolute, we shall now explain the far-reaching significance of 



Radiant Energy 197 

this statement. In order to do so it must first be appreciated that 
a velocity is composed of a distance in space divided by an 
interval of time (for example, the number of miles travelled in one 
hour). So the speed-measuring instrument which we mentioned 
in our example of the cars must be capable of measuring both 
these quantities. 

Furthermore, we must now rid ourselves of the preconceived 
idea that lengths or time-intervals are themselves absolute (that 
is, unchangeable). It must be accepted as an experimental fact that 
a rod which is one yard long when it is at rest, becomes shorter 
when its velocity is increased. This effect is negligible at our every- 
day velocities, but at velocities which approach that of light it 
becomes very important. This contraction of length with in- 
creasing velocity is called the Lorentz-Fitzgerald Contraction 
after the two discoverers, but its significance, as embodied in the 
Special Theory of Relativity, was first postulated by the late 
Professor Einstein. A similar phenomenon to the Lorentz- 
Fitzgerald Contraction is the slowing up of time with increasing 
velocity; thus a clock at rest may tick every quarter of a second, 
but the interval between each tick will become longer as the 
velocity of the clock through space is increased. 

Bearing in mind these two facts, we can now understand the 
apparently unintelligible result we mentioned in the example of 
the two cars. In the second case the speed-measuring instrument 
in car A was travelling at 167,000 miles per second and therefore 
the lengths of its components would be appreciably shortened, 
and the clock mechanism it contained would tick more slowly 
than it did in the first example when it was travelling at 30 miles 
per hour. These changes combine to compensate exactly for the 
difference between the measured velocity of the light beam of 
186,000 miles per second and the expected, non-relativistic 
velocity of 19,000 miles per second. (It must be made quite clear 
that the velocity of 19,000 miles per second would only be 
expected by someone who did not know the Theory of Relativity.) 

Mass and Energy 

As a result of the Special Theory of Relativity it can be shown 

mathematically that the contraction in length of a body as its 



198 Introducing Science 

velocity increases is accompanied by an increase in its mass. 
Again this effect is negligible at everyday velocities, but, for 
example, at 99 per cent of the velocity of light the mass of a 
body is about seven times greater than its mass at rest. 

This increase of mass with velocity leads directly to the famous 
Einstein relationship between mass and energy: in fact, the mass 
of a body increases as a result of the additional energy which it 
acquires by virtue of its velocity. 

The equivalence of mass and energy so derived is expressed by 
the simple equation: E = me 2 , where E = energy, m = mass,, 
and c = velocity of light. 

We see from this equation the importance of the velocity of 
light; it is, so to speak, the connecting link between mass and 
energy. Why this should be is unexplained; we can only say that 
this is the way the universe is constructed. The far-reaching 
effects of this mass-energy relationship are discussed in Chapter 
1 1 on nuclear energy. 

A further conclusion of the Special Theory of Relativity is that 
no body in the universe can travel at a speed equal to or greater 
than that of light, for in order to do so it would require an 
infinite amount of energy. This means that the velocity of light 
sets an upper limit to the rate of motion within the universe - it is 
a limiting velocity. 

Space and Time 

In the foregoing paragraphs we have shown that lengths and time- 
intervals are not absolute quantities, but are relative to the 
velocity of the measurers. This means that the conception of 
simultaneity must lose its significance. For instance, two events 
taking place at two widely separated points on the surface of the 
earth might appear to an observer at a third point on the earth to 
be simultaneous; they would not necessarily, however, appear to 
be simultaneous to an observer with a sufficiently strong telescope 
on Mars. This is because the earth and Mars are moving through 
space at different velocities, and as we have seen distances and 
time-intervals have different values for observers moving at 
different velocities. 
To replace the conception of simultaneity, the Theory of 



Radiant Energy 199 

Relativity has been developed so that occurrences may be pin- 
pointed in space and time in an accurate manner which takes into 
account the relative nature of lengths and time-intervals. In order 
to do this it has been necessary to abandon the usual way of 
thinking in terms of three dimensions of space and a separate 
dimension of time; instead we have to visualize a four- 
dimensional space-time continuum. On this subject a few words 
of explanation are required. 

When in 1916 Einstein came to consider the wider significance 
of his Special Theory of Relativity he was forced, for reasons 
which would require a mathematical explanation, to think in 
terms of a system of geometry more widely applicable than 
that devised some 2,000 years ago by Euclid. In Euclidean 
geometry the basis of all the theorems is the straight line, to 
which is assigned the property that through a given point only 
one such line is possible which is parallel to another given 
straight line. Furthermore, in Euclidean geometry time has no 
place and has, therefore, to be considered independently from 
space. 

For everyday purposes this system is adequate, but when inter- 
stellar distances and the velocities of atomic particles are con- 
sidered Euclidean geometry loses its validity. Einstein was 
therefore forced to make use of a more widely applicable system 
of geometry, and for this purpose he adopted a system which had 
been invented by a mathematician called Riemann. 

According to Riemann's geometry, space can no longer be 
considered independently from the phenomena which take place 
in it - it is therefore in some senses a fusion of geometry and 
physics. However, in the space so defined, the straight line loses 
its paramount significance, and space itself has to be regarded as 
being curved in such a way that the dimensions of the curvature 
depend on the distribution of masses within it. 

Although it is somewhat difficult to visualize, it must be 
accepted that in order to define, spatially and temporally, 
any phenomenon in the universe, the definition, if it is to be 
valid under all circumstances, must locate the phenomenon 
in a four-dimensional space-time continuum within curved 
space. 



200 Introducing Science 

Gravitation 

The dependence of the shape of space upon the masses contained 
by it led Einstein to consider the forces of gravity, and to in- 
corporate an understanding of these forces within what is known 
as his General Theory of Relativity. 

So far we have said very little about gravitational forces, but 
we must now make a few remarks on this subject in order to 
explain Einstein's theory. In the seventeenth century Newton was 
able to explain the forces of gravity in terms of a simple law. He 
found that all bodies in the universe which exhibit the property 
of mass attract one another, and that the magnitude of the 
attractive force is proportional to the product of the masses and 
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. 
That is to say, the force (F) between two bodies of mass mi and 
m 2 , separated by a distance (rf) is given by the equation: 



where K is a universal constant. 

It is, of course, the force of gravity which keeps the solar system 
together; for example, the earth remains in its orbit about the 
sun because the gravitational force between them exactly counter- 
balances the centrifugal force (the force developed by all bodies 
which move in a circular path). For similar reasons the moon and 
man-made earth satellites circle the earth in stable orbits. 

The Newtonian explanation of gravity, however, gave no 
reason for its cause, it only described its magnitude. On the other 
hand, Einstein's General Theory of Relativity seeks to explain 
gravitation as a property of space. According to this interpreta- 
tion, the presence of matter within space causes it to curve in 
such a manner that a field of gravitational forces is created. Once 
again this is a conception better expressed in mathematical equa- 
tions (which are beyond the scope of this book) than in words. 

This theory is clearly not the last word on the subject of 
gravitation, and in fact Einstein spent the last years of his life in an 
unsuccessful search for a unified field theory which would accom- 
modate both the gravitational field and the electromagnetic field 
in one set of equations. Such a unified field theory is still the 



Radiant Energy 201 

subject of present research, but no way has yet been found of 
fitting the conception of gravitation within the framework of the 
Quantum Theory which, as we have seen, is so necessary to an 
explanation of the electromagnetic field. 

In addition to the two fields of force which we have mentioned 
there is a third field - the field of nuclear interaction which we 
shall have to discuss in the next chapter. It appears, at the present 
state of our knowledge, that these three fields are separate 
entities, but at the back of every physicist's mind is the hope that 
one day our understanding of nature will yield a system in which 
they will be integrated. 



CHAPTER 11 

NUCLEAR ENERGY 



IN our analysis of the constitution of matter in Chapter 2 it was 
only necessary to give a very cursory outline of the structure of 
the atomic nucleus, because in that chapter we were discussing 
chemical reactions only. As we learnt then, in chemist ry inter- 
actions between atoms are restricted to exchanges between orbital 
electrons: the nucleus itself remains intact. During the last twenty 
or thirty years, however, a whole new science of nuclear physics 
has developed as a result of which we are now able to bring 
about nuclear reactions which liberate enormous quantities of 
energy. We are familiar with this energy in the atomic bomb and 
the nuclear power station. 

The energy which is liberated during nuclear reactions is a 
consequence of the conversion of matter into energy according 
to Einstein's equation, which he was able to show followed from 
his Special Theory of Relativity (see page 198). It will be 
remembered that in this equation, energy (E) is equated with the 
product of mass (m) and the square of the velocity of light (c) : 
E = me 2 . 

As the velocity of light is such a very large number, it follows 
from this equation that very little matter is required to create an 
enormous quantity of energy; in fact it is a simple calculation to 
show that the destruction of only one gram of matter would yield 
about one-and-a-half million horse power of energy for twenty- 
four hours. This mass-energy relationship remained a theoretical 
speculation until 1932 when the British physicists Cockroft and 
Walton carried out an experiment in which they used a stream of 
protons (hydrogen atom nuclei symbolized Hi) to bombard an 
isotope of the element lithium of atomic weight 7 (Li?). The 
lithium nucleus was decomposed into a pair of helium nuclei 
(HeJ, or a-particles): H} + LiJ - 2Hef . (We have already illu- 
strated equations of this type on page 193 ; it will be remembered 
that the subscripts refer to the nuclear charge while the super- 



Nuclear Energy 203 

scripts refer to the number of protons plus neutrons in the 
nucleus.) This experiment was not only remarkable because of the 
artificial transmutation of the elements which had occurred, but 
because it gave experimental proof of Einstein's mass-energy 
equation. 

The Mass Defect 

In Cockroft and Walton's experiment it was found that the energy 
of the pairs of helium atoms was greater than that of the bombard- 
ing protons. This could only have occurred if energy had been 
created as a result of a loss of mass in the interacting nuclei. In 
fact the mass of the two helium nuclei was 8-0078 units (on the 
atomic-weight scale, see page 29), whereas the mass of the proton 
and lithium nucleus combined was 8-0261 units; there was 
therefore a loss of 0-0183 units. 

This loss of mass, known as the mass defect y was found to be 
exactly equivalent, in accordance with Einstein's equation, to the 
energy gained in the process by the newly formed helium nuclei. 
In order to understand the source of this energy, and the way in 
which it is liberated, it will be necessary to examine the structure 
of the nucleus more closely. 

The Neutrino 

In Chapter 2 we said that the nuclei of all the atoms of the 
elements consisted of arrangements of only two types of particle, 
namely the proton and the neutron. We also said, when discussing 
radioactivity, that one of the emanations during radioactive 
decay was /J-rays, which consist of streams of electrons. As the 
nucleus is too small to contain electrons, some further explanation 
is clearly needed. 

This paradox was overcome by the prediction of a further sub- 
atomic particle which was given the name neutrino. This particle, 
as its name implies, has no charge and no mass when it is at rest, 
but it has the ability of carrying energy (and also 'spin* or 
angular momentum, which it is not necessary to discuss in this 
context). 

With the aid of this particle, /J-rays are explained as the 
emission of an electron (e~) when a neutron (n) transforms into a 



204 Introducing Science 

proton (p), a neutrino (v) being emitted at the same time: 
n ^ p + e - + v. We thus learn that protons and neutrons are 
not entirely separate particles, but according to the current view 
they may be regarded as different forms of the same entity, and 
the word nucleon is used to describe either of them. 

The discovery of the neutrino also solved another problem con- 
cerned with the -rays emitted by a radioactive source, as the 
following example illustrates. 

There is a radioactive isotope of phosphorus, of atomic weight 
32 (Pfi), which decays to a stable isotope of sulphur (SJ|) with 
the emanation of an electron (]8-ray): P?f -*S?i + ft-i. Now the 
loss of mass during this decay should exactly equal the energy of 
the emitted electron on the Einstein mass-energy basis, but it 
was found that, in fact, the emitted electrons had a wide distribu- 
tion of velocities giving them energies ranging from almost noth- 
ing up to the expected figure. There is therefore, on average, a 
deficiency of energy, which is made good by the postulation of 
the neutrino, for it is assumed that neutrinos emitted during 
/?-decay have an energy compensating for the deficiency. 

It must be added that having no charge, and no rest-mass, the 
neutrino is extremely difficult to detect, which accounts for the 
fact that it was not discovered until long after the nucleons. 

NUCLEAR COHESIVE FORCES 

So far, in our discussion of the nucleus, all the constituent 
particles which we have described have been either positively 
charged or electrically neutral; it would therefore be expected 
that the nucleus would fly apart as a result of the electrostatic 
repulsion which we have said always exists between two similarly 
charged particles. (It should be noted again, in this context, that 
the existence of electrons within the nucleus is not possible 
because the nucleus is simply not large enough to contain them.) 
In order to account for the cohesion of nucleons within the 
nucleus, therefore, a new class of particles was postulated by the 
Japanese physicist Yukawa in 1935, and their existence was subse- 
quently confirmed as a result of cosmic-ray interactions (see 
page 191). The particles of this class are called mesons, and with 



Nuclear Energy 205 

their aid a different form of cohesion has been worked out based 
on exchange forces. Before elaborating on these new forces, how- 
ever, it will be necessary to say something about mesons them- 
selves. 

Mesons 

There are in fact several kinds of meson, some positively charged, 
some negatively charged, and some neutral. All, however, have a 
mass between that of the electron and the proton, and all are 
extremely unstable - the most durable meson exists for about one 
millionth of a second. 

It is not necessary to go into the incomplete and somewhat 
complicated theory governing the decay and interchange of these 
particles; for the present purpose it is sufficient to say that the 
nucleus is to be thought of as being in a state of flux, in which 
cohesive forces are created by the 'exchange' of positive, nega- 
tive, and neutral mesons between neutrons and protons which, 
as we have already seen, have the ability of changing into each 
other. 

It has been said, by way of analogy, that, if the nucleons are 
regarded as the building bricks of the nucleus, the mesons are 
the cement which binds them together. It is admitted that there 
is still some difficulty in visualizing just what does happen within 
the nucleus, but it must be remembered that although we have 
spoken throughout this chapter of subatomic 'particles', we have 
been using the word more as an analogy than a precise descrip- 
tion. Indeed, at a conference held in Rochester in 1960, some 
thirty subatomic particles were discussed although no coherent 
theory could be presented to account for their manifold inter- 
actions. 

Exchange Forces 

It is, however, usual to classify the interactions between subatomic 
particles into three groups: strong interactions between nucleons 
and mesons (exchange forces), electromagnetic interactions be- 
tween protons and electrons, and finally weak interactions which 
result from the decay of neutrons as well as certain other pro- 
cesses which we need not detail. 



206 Introducing Science 

The electromagnetic interactions, which account for the 
electrostatic repulsion between protons, fall off in effect as the 
particles come closer together; in fact at distances of less than 
10~ 13 cm. the attractive exchange forces between protons and 
protons, and protons and neutrons, are some hundred times 
stronger than the electrostatic repulsive forces. 

As nucleons within an atomic nucleus are packed together so 
closely that they may be regarded as almost touching each other, 
these strong exchange forces take over from the electrostatic 
forces and account for the cohesion of the nucleus. In this way 
central nucleons within the nucleus are pulled equally from all 
directions, while a nucleon at the surface is pulled only from the 
interior - a surface effect therefore develops so that, like a water 
droplet which experiences similar forces on the molecular scale, 
the nucleus adopts a spherical shape. 

This surface effect is clearly much more pronounced in the 
smaller nuclei because they consist of only a few nucleons, a 
relatively high proportion of which are at the surface. With the 
larger nuclei, that is to say from about forty nucleons upwards, 
the electrostatic repulsion is a factor which has an appreciable 
effect, and therefore the nuclei are not so rigidly bound together. 
This accounts for the fact that the largest nuclei of all are not 
stable - in other words they are radioactive. As we shall see later, 
however, atomic bombs and nuclear power stations do not depend 
on natural radioactivity; for such purposes arrangements have to 
be made for breaking these heavy nuclei in two by bombarding 
them with neutrons, whereas during natural radioactive decay 
only fragments of the nucleus are thrown out in the form of a- 
and /3-particles. 

Binding Energy 

We have said that the nucleus is held together very rigidly by 
exchange forces, and it is obvious that a considerable amount of 
energy must be linked with these forces. This is called the binding 
energy of the nucleus, and it is equal in magnitude to the mass 
defect which we have already mentioned. This will be apparent 
from the following remarks. 
The constituents of a deuterium nucleus ('heavy hydrogen') 



Nuclear Energy 207 

are a proton of mass 1-00758 units and a neutron of mass 
1-00895 units, i.e., a combined mass of 2-01653 units. It is an 
experimental fact, however, that the mass of the deuterium 
nucleus is only 2-01419 units; that is to say, there is a mass defect 
when a proton and a neutron combine of 0-00234 units. This is 
equivalent to the energy holding the nucleus of deuterium 
together - its binding energy. It is also the energy required to 
break the nucleus into its constituents or conversely the energy 
evolved when the nucleus is formed. 

For nuclei of up to about forty nucleons, in which we have seen 
that there is a pronounced surface effect, the addition of each 
nucleon increases the mass defect, and hence the building up of 
nuclei of less than forty nucleons leads to the evolution of energy. 
On the other hand, owing to the electrostatic effect, it is the 
breaking up of the heavier nuclei that leads to an increased mass 
defect and the evolution of energy. In other words, the fission of 
heavy nuclei or the fusion of light nuclei leads to the evolution of 
energy. We must now discuss separately each of these two 
methods of obtaining energy from the nucleus. We shall start 
with nuclear fission and follow with nuclear fusion. 



NUCLEAR FISSION 

We have given some explanation as to the reason for energy 
being liberated when a large nucleus disintegrates, and have said 
that in order to make use of this energy the nucleus has to be split 
in two by bombarding it with neutrons. It should be noted that 
neutrons make particularly effective nuclear missiles because they 
have no charge and are therefore not electrostatically repelled 
from their targets. Protons and a-particles have also been used 
for attacking the nucleus, but being positively charged they are 
repelled from it and are not, therefore, so effective as neutrons. 
(The nucleus as a whole is, of course, positively charged.) 

In order to understand the working of the atomic bomb and a 
nuclear reactor as used in power stations for the production of 
electrical energy, we must now consider what happens when the 
heaviest of the natural dements, uranium, is bombarded with 
neutrons. 



208 Introducing Science 

Isotopes of Uranium 

Natural uranium consists of three isotopes of mass 234, 235, and 
238 respectively. The isotope of mass 234 is present in only 
minute proportions and can for all practical purposes be dis- 
regarded. The 235 isotope is the most important, as we shall see 
later, although out of every 1,000 atoms of natural uranium only 
about 7 are of this isotope; nearly all the remaining 993 atoms 
are of the 238 variety. 

If the 238 isotope of uranium (written Ugi 8 or just U 238 ) is 
bombarded by neutrons of all speeds, only the fastest-moving 
neutrons are able to break the nucleus into two approximately 
equal parts, i.e., to cause fission. On the other hand, this isotope 
has the ability of capturing a slow-moving neutron with the 
result that a fourth isotope of uranium of atomic weight 239 is 
formed. This isotope is, however, very unstable, having a half- 
life of only twenty-three minutes, and it decays by emitting an 
electron, thus gaining a positive charge. (It gains a positive 
charge because it has lost a negative charge.) The uranium-239 
(U|| 9 ) is thereby transformed into a new element called neptu- 
nium of atomic number 93 and atomic weight 239 (Npii 9 ). This 
new element is itself very unstable (half-life 2-3 days) and 
also emits an electron, becoming another new element, plutonium 
(Pli! 9 )* which, although radioactive, is relatively stable with a 
half-life of 24,000 years. This sequence of events can be repre- 
sented thus: Uit 8 + nJ->Ui! 9 ^e_ t -I- Npil 9 ->e__! + Pl^ 9 - 
At this point we may note that, for the first time, we are discussing 
elements which have an atomic number in excess of 92. These 
elements, which are called for obvious reasons Transuranic 
elements, were not included in the list of elements given in 
Chapter 2 because they are not found in nature as their lives are 
far too short compared with that of the earth. 

Now the transuranic element plutonium has a great deal in 
common with the 235 isotope of uranium as they are both 
fissioned fairly readily by neutrons of all speeds, but particularly 
by slow neutrons. Furthermore, each fission of a uranium-235 or 
plutonium nucleus into two approximately equal parts also 
creates between two and three fresh neutrons, which are in turn 
available to cause further fissions. Clearly, then, these two 



Nuclear Energy 209 

materials will sustain a chain reaction which will continue until 
all available nuclei have been fissioned. 

The Atomic Bomb 

The chain reaction which we have just described proceeds with 
explosive rapidity and the evolution of tremendous energy, as the 
survivors of the Hiroshima explosion can testify, for the atomic 
bomb dropped on Hiroshima consisted of some five to ten 
pounds of uranium-235, with an explosive effect equal to about 
20,000 tons (20 kilotons) of TNT. Later models of the fission 
bomb employ plutonium to even greater effect, but these weapons 
are dwarfed by the hydrogen fusion bomb which we shall 
describe later. 

Although this may be no place to air political arguments either 
for, or against, these appalling weapons, the writer of this book 
believes that no man of conscience should allow any opportunity 
to pass without condemning them absolutely and appealing for 
their total abolition. Scientists have unlocked for the world the 
secrets of nuclear reactions, and it is therefore their responsibility 
to see that they are used for the betterment of civilization and not 
its destruction. 

With no apologies for these remarks, we may now return to 
the mechanism of the bomb. 

It so happens that these two isotopes, uranium-235 and 
plutonium, are particularly suitable for military purposes, not 
only because they will sustain a chain reaction, but also because 
in quantities of less than a certain mass, called the critical mass, 
they are perfectly safe to store and handle. 

The critical mass for uranium-235 is about three pounds; this 
is because a smaller lump, with its comparatively large surface 
area, will lose so many neutrons from its surface that there will 
not be enough within the body of the material to sustain a chain 
reaction. However, if the mass of material is increased, the 
surface area per unit of volume will be reduced, and as soon as 
the critical mass is reached there will be sufficient neutrons to 
keep the chain reaction alive. The atomic bomb is, therefore, 
constructed of two lumps of uranium-235, each with a mass less 
than the critical mass but greater than half the critical mass. When 



210 Introducing Science 

the bomb is fired these two lumps of uranium are brought to- 
gether very rapidly, so that one lump in excess of the critical 
mass is formed. The chain reaction then proceeds and the bomb 
explodes. 

It must be emphasized that even one stray neutron is sufficient 
to detonate a quantity of uranium-235 in excess of the critical 
mass, and there are always enough stray neutrons in the atmo- 
sphere for this purpose, as a result of cosmic ray reactions (see 
page 190). It is, therefore, essential to store uranium-235 and 
plutonium in quantities of less than the critical mass. 

The Atomic Pile 

The uncontrolled chain reaction which takes place in the atomic 
bomb is, of course, not suitable for the production of energy in 
an atomic pile (or nuclear reactor as it is perhaps more sensibly 
called) - far too much energy is released in far too short a time. 
The reaction therefore has to be tamed to produce energy at a 
much more leisurely pace. 

Another important difference between the bomb and the 
reactor is that the former requires only a small quantity of 
fissionable material for its one devastating explosion, whereas the 
latter requires a steady supply of fissionable material which will 
produce energy day in and day out. Therefore the use of either 
plutonium or the rare uranium-235 would be prohibitively ex- 
pensive : what is required is a method of using naturally occurring 
uranium, or naturally occurring uranium enriched with an extra 
quantity of plutonium or the 235 isotope. 

Thermal Neutrons 

The difficulty of using naturally occurring uranium is that, as we 
have seen, the common 238 isotope which forms the greater part 
of its bulk has the ability of capturing neutrons of certain speeds ; 
many of the neutrons liberated by the fission of the small number 
of uranium-235 nuclei present will therefore be absorbed by the 
plentiful uranium-238 nuclei. 

This obstacle to the use of natural uranium can, however, be 
overcome by greatly slowing down the free neutrons in the 
uranium material so that they have too little energy to be 



Nuclear Energy 211 

captured by the 238 nuclei, but sufficient energy to fission the 
235 nuclei. Indeed, it is a happy coincidence that such very slow 
neutrons are the most efficient at bringing about the fission of 
235 nuclei. Neutrons which have suitable energies to meet these 
requirements are called thermal neutrons^ because their energies 
are so reduced that they are comparable to the thermal energies 
of the atoms amongst which they move. It must be stressed that 
thermal neutrons are very much less energetic than the slow 
neutrons captured by 238 nuclei. 

The thermalizing (or slowing down) of neutrons is achieved by 
allowing them to collide repeatedly with light nuclei of other 
elements which do not either fission or capture them. Substances 
used for this purpose are called moderators, and it will now be 
necessary to say a few more words on this subject. 

Moderators 

In order to function usefully as a moderator for the thermalizing 

of neutrons, a substance must have the following properties: 

1. It must not capture neutrons (for reasons which we have 
described). 

2. It must consist of light atoms. Neutrons can be thought of in 
this sense as ping-pong balls; if a ping-pong ball collides with 
a relatively large object, such as a football, it will simply re- 
bound without the loss of much energy, but if it collides with 
a ball more of its own size and weight, it will share a large 
portion of its energy with the other ball, the course and speed 
of which will be considerably altered. In the same way fast 
neutrons will only lose a substantial part of their energy by 
colliding with light nuclei. 

3. A moderator must be available in the liquid or solid state, in 
order that it may be mixed with the uranium which is, of 
course, a solid. Helium, for example, would be a good modera- 
tor because it complies with the first two requirements, but as 
it is a gas which forms no compounds it cannot be used for 
this purpose. 

The two substances which are most used as moderators at 
present, because they fulfil all these three requirements, are pure 



212 Introducing Science 

carbon, in the form of graphite, and heavy water (water formed 
from deuterium instead of hydrogen - formula D 2 O). The earliest 
types of nuclear reactor consisted of slabs of natural uranium and 
slabs of graphite piled together (hence the name 'atomic pile') in 
a casing of graphite. More modern reactors consist of slabs of 
natural uranium enriched with uranium-235 immersed in a tank 
of heavy water. The heavy water can in this case be used as a 
cooling liquid for the extraction of the heat energy from the 
reactor as shown in Figure 48. 



cadmium 

control 

rods 




i concrete shield 

graphite 
- neutron 
reflector 



heavy water 
moderator 
and coolant 




electricity 



O- 



i v generator 

\ 

turbine 



-uranium ^ 

fuel elements ordinary water 

Fig. 48 



Cooling Fluid 

The heat energy liberated by a nuclear reaction is always collected 
by a cooling fluid which circulates through the reaction chamber. 
As this fluid becomes radioactive due to the neutron bombard- 
ment to which it is subjected, a closed circuit is usually employed 
so that the problem of disposing of large quantities of radioactive 
cooling fluid does not arise. 

We have mentioned above that heavy water can be used as 
both moderator and cooling fluid. In such cases, of course, a 
closed circuit is used, the heat of the heavy water being transferred 
to ordinary water in a heat exchanger. The steam thus generated 



Nuclear Energy 2 1 3 

is used to drive a turbine, which in turn drives an electric 
generator. It will be seen, therefore, that in an atomic power 
station the nuclear reactor replaces only the boiler of a con- 
ventional power station. Other cooling fluids in current use are 
compressed carbon dioxide and a molten alloy of metallic sodium 
and potassium. 

Control Rods 

We have described in bare outline the principle of the nuclear 
reactor, in which the chain reaction of uranium-235 in natural 
uranium is propagated by neutrons which have been thermalized 
by the use of a moderator, but we have not mentioned the 
method of controlling the rate of reaction. 

While it is true to say that the moderator controls the speed of 
the neutrons, and thus to a certain extent the progress of the 
reaction, the actual minute-to-minute control of the reaction is 
achieved by controlling the number of neutrons which are at 
large within the reaction vessel. For this purpose the metal 
cadmium is very suitable as it is an efficient capturer of neutrons. 
Therefore rods of cadmium (or cadmium-plated rods) are in- 
serted into the reaction vessel, and the progress of the reaction is 
controlled by raising and lowering these rods in the reactor. If 
for any reason the reaction should get out of hand, the rods are 
fully lowered automatically so that the reaction is arrested, 

Gamma-radiation and Shielding 

Owing to the fact that most nuclear reactions are accompanied 
by the emanation of y-rays, which are very dangerous to living 
organisms (see page 1 89), it is necessary to shield nuclear reactors 
inside a casing of concrete several feet thick. It is fortunate that 
concrete is a fairly efficient absorber of y-rays and, at the same 
time, owing to the large number of hydrogen atoms which it 
contains, an effective capturer of any stray neutrons which may 
have escaped from the reactor. 

Fission Products 

When a uranium-235 nucleus is fissioned by a thermal neutron it 

is, as we have said, split into two smaller nuclei and two or three 



214 Introducing Science 

neutrons. The two nuclei formed are not necessarily of exactly 
equal size, nor in fact does every fission always produce the same 
end-products. 

The commonest fission products formed have mass numbers 
(number of protons plus number of neutrons), around 90 and 140, 
but in all cases, of course, the total of the mass numbers of the 
two new nuclei and the two or three neutrons must equal 235. 
Similarly the atomic numbers of the two new nuclei must add up 
to 92. It is obvious then that, as the reaction progresses, the 
natural uranium will become increasingly contaminated with 
elements that have been created as a result of the fissions. Some 
of these elements may be innocuous, but some, such as the isotope 
of the rare gas xenon (Xe^ 5 ) are very effective neutron capturers 
and if allowed to remain in the fuel elements (as the sticks of 
uranium are called) would absorb sufficient neutrons to bring the 
chain reaction to a standstill. For this reason the fuel elements 
must be removed periodically so that the fission products can be 
extracted by chemical means. This operation has to be carried 
out by remote control, behind heavy shielding, as the fuel ele- 
ments are extremely radioactive. 

While fission products in general are detrimental to the opera- 
tion of an atomic reactor, one in particular is beneficial - this is 
plutonium. We described earlier how plutonium is created as a 
result of the capture by a uranium-238 nucleus of a fairly slow 
neutron (but one that is still considerably more energetic than a 
thermal neutron). Although the moderator is present in the 
reactor to thermalize the free neutrons, some of them will collide 
with uranium-238 nuclei before they have had sufficient collisions 
with moderator atoms to be thermalized. For this reason a certain 
amount of plutonium will always be created in a reactor, and as 
it is fissioned by thermal neutrons in the same way as uranium-235 
its presence in the fuel elements is advantageous to the progress 
of the reaction. 

As plutonium is also required for the manufacture of bombs, 
it is usually extracted from the fuel elements when they are 
removed for purification. Indeed, some of the earlier reactors 
were constructed solely for the purpose of manufacturing 
plutonium for military uses, despite the fact that the quantity of 



Nuclear Energy 215 

plutonium formed is only of the order of one pound per ton of 
natural uranium. 

Fast Breeder Reactors 

Another type of nuclear reactor, now In operation at Dounreay 
in Scotland, is the so-called fast breeder reactor in which no 
moderator is used for thermalizing the neutrons. 

This reactor consists of a small core of natural uranium en- 
riched with plutonium, in which fast neutrons are allowed to 
produce a fairly fast chain reaction (but not of course as fast as 
the pure uranium-235 reaction of the bomb). Neutrons are 
allowed to escape from this central core into a surrounding 
blanket of natural uranium where some of them will be captured 
by uranium-238 nuclei with the consequent formation of plu- 
tonium. By suitable control of the conditions more plutonium 
can be produced in the natural uranium blanket than is used in 
enriching the core, and it is for this reason that the reactor is 
called a 'breeder*. 

There is no doubt that fission reactors of one sort or another 
have a great future for the production of electrical energy 
throughout the world, and although several such reactors are cur- 
rently in operation, they cannot yet be said to have passed their 
development stage. 

Radioactive Isotopes 

Nuclear reactors are not only useful for the production of energy 
and plutonium for military purposes; they also have a further 
use which is of great value. 

If common elements are inserted into the neutron flux within a 
reactor, artificial radioactive isotopes of these common elements 
are frequently formed as a result of neutron capture. For example, 
common sodium (Naf ?) forms a radioactive isotope of mass 
number 24: Naff + nj -*Na?$. 

Radioactive isotopes of this type have many industrial, bio- 
logical, and medical uses because, while they are chemically 
indistinguishable from the common isotopes, their progress 
through a mechanical or biological system can be traced as a 
result of their radioactive emanations. Molecules containing 



216 Introducing Science 

artificial radioactive isotopes are said, for this reason, to be 
labelled. We have already mentioned the use of radioactive 
carbon- 14 in the dating of wood of unknown age, due to the tree 
from which it came taking up labelled carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere (see page 192). If such labelled carbon dioxide is 
mixed with ordinary carbon dioxide and fed to plants in the 
laboratory, the manner and speed of the incorporation of carbon 
into the structure of plants can be followed. This radioactive 
carbon will behave chemically in exactly the same way as 
ordinary carbon, because it differs from ordinary carbon only in 
the mass of its nucleus. Chemical behaviour, as we have seen, 
depends on orbital electrons and therefore upon the nuclear 
charge, not the nuclear mass. 

A similar use to the tracing of radioactive carbon in plants, is 
the tracing of radioactive phosphorus in the bones of mammals. 
On the same principle radioactive iodine has been used for tracing 
the functioning of the thyroid gland and radioactive iron for 
examining the mechanism of blood formation. Many radio iso- 
topes are also used for the treatment of medical conditions; for 
example, radioactive cobalt is of great benefit in the treatment of 
deep-seated cancer as it produces y-rays of particularly suitable 
energy and intensity for this purpose. Industrially, radio isotopes 
have been used for a variety of purposes including the measure- 
ment of wear and the rate of flow of liquids.* These are only a 
few of the many uses of these extremely interesting by-products 
of nuclear energy. 

FUSION REACTIONS 

Having given a necessarily brief outline of the mechanism and 
uses of nuclear fission reactions, we may now pass to the second 
method of obtaining energy from the atomic nucleus, that is 
nuclear fusion. We have already said that the fusion of two light 
nuclei to form one heavier nucleus is attended by a substantial 
mass defect and the consequent evolution of an equivalent 
quantity of energy. It is from reactions of this type that the energy 

*These uses are fully described in Isotopes by J. L. Putman (Penguin 
Books, Harmondsworth, 1960). 



Nuclear Energy 217 

of the sun and the stars is derived - in particular, from the fusion 
of hydrogen nuclei to form helium. 

This reaction does not take place directly, but in various stages 
involving the formation of deuterium (heavy hydrogen, Df ) and 
tritium (an unstable radioactive isotope of hydrogen the nucleus 
of which contains one proton and two neutrons, Hf). These 
fusion reactions may be summarized as follows: 

HJ -f nJ-*D? 

D? -j-D? ->Hf + H{ 

DJ -f HJ -> He* + nj 

Each one of these reactions liberates vast quantities of energy, 
but none of them can be made to occur unless temperatures of 
several millions of degrees Centigrade are attained. This is because 
in order to bring these light particles close enough to each other 
to cause them to fuse, it is necessary for them to be accelerated 
to enormous speeds. 

The Hydrogen Bomb 

The only fusion reactions that have so far been brought about 
by man are those of the hydrogen bomb. This weapon consists of 
a normal uranium-235 or plutonium fission bomb surrounded by 
a layer of hydrogenous material. In this way the hydrogen nuclei 
are subjected to the extremely high temperatures required to 
initiate the fusion reactions mentioned above, and the neutrons 
which emerge from the fission core have sufficient energy to 
combine with the hydrogen nuclei. Reactions which occur at 
these temperatures are called thermonuclear reactions. 

It should be noted that while fission bombs are limited in size 
by the critical mass effect which we have mentioned, hydrogen 
bombs can be made of virtually any size and destructive power. 
It will be remembered that the Hiroshima bomb was said to be 
equivalent to 20 kilotons (20,000 tons) of TNT -current models 
of the hydrogen bomb are rated at about 20 megatons (20 million 
tons) of TNT, while the Soviet Union has nowtested a 50-megaton 
bomb. 

THERMONUCLEAR REACTIONS 

Physicists all over the world are currently trying to discover ways 



218 Introducing Science 

of harnessing the energy of thermonuclear reactions for peaceful 
uses. Such reactions have the great advantage over fission re- 
actions in that they use as a fuel the plentiful element hydrogen, 
instead of the relatively scarce element uranium. The sea is full 
of water, every molecule of which contains two atoms of 
hydrogen! 

However, the problem of containing within a vessel a reaction 
which takes place at several millions of degrees Centigrade has not 
yet been solved, although several attempts are being made at a 
solution. Of the various experimental devices that have been used 
to examine these thermonuclear reactions, one of the earliest was 
the British device known as Z E T A (Zero Energy Thermonuclear 
Assembly). This apparatus consists of a torus- (doughnut-) shaped 
vessel containing the gas mixture, to which an enormous voltage 
is applied in pulses of very brief duration. These pulses ionize the 
gas mixture, which in the ionized state is called a plasma, and 
raise its temperature to some million degrees Centigrade for a 
tiny fraction of a second. 

In this sort of apparatus the problem of keeping the gas away 
from the walls of the vessel is partly solved for us by nature, 
for the current itself creates a very strong magnetic field which 
tends to confine the hot plasma to the centre of the tube. This 
contraction of the plasma, under the influence of a magnetic field, 
is called the pinch effect. 

Unfortunately, however, the column of gas in the centre of 
the tube is not stable and tends to develop kinks, and therefore 
additional magnetic fields have to be provided from the outside 
in order to stabilize it. 

These experiments have not yet met with complete success, 
and they have not so far provided a method of extracting the 
energy from the reaction. ZETA was designed to create only 
sufficient energy to sustain the reaction, but the experiments have 
not fully realized the hopes of those who designed them. 

The extraction of energy from thermonuclear reactions (once 
they have been made to take place under controlled conditions) 
presents a formidable and entirely unprecedented set of problems. 
It is hoped that, eventually, a way will be found for extracting 
electrical energy directly from the reaction without the cumber- 



Nuclear Energy 219 

some intermediary of steam-generating equipment, turbines, and 
generators. No work has yet been done on this aspect of the 
problem, but it is hoped that within the next few decades man 
will have been able to imitate the energy-producing mechanism 
of the stars, and so provide himself with an abundant and cheap 
supply of energy for his betterment and prosperity. 

Undoubtedly thermonuclear reactions hold the key to the 
future development of our civilization. It is for the people of the 
world to decide whether this key shall be used to unlock the vast 
storehouse of free-for-all energy, or whether it shall be used to 
unleash the final devastating cataclysm of an H-bomb war. 



PART FOUR 

THE BOUNDARIES OF 
KNOWLEDGE 



CHAPTER 12 

THE CREATION 



IN the second and third parts of this book we have attempted to 
give a descriptive analysis of the nature and interrelation of the 
matter and energy which constitute the universe. This analysis 
has been based on evidence gained as a result of our sensory 
experiences, coupled with an ability to understand this evidence 
in terms of our deductive powers. 

Every explanation which we have given has withstood the test 
of repeated experimental verification, but there are some pheno- 
mena which, either through lack of evidence or lack of under- 
standing, we have been unable to fit into the general body of our 
knowledge. These are the topics which form the last part of this 
book, but before discussing them it is appropriate that we should 
repeat the qualification we made in Chapter 1 ; that is, scientific 
knowledge does not pretend to be absolute, it strives continually 
towards a deeper and more comprehensive understanding of the 
laws which govern the workings of the universe. 

Firstly, then, we shall say something about those questions 
which, through lack of evidence, have puzzled man since his 
advent - these questions concern the creation of the universe, of 
the earth, and of life on earth. We shall then refer to some of the 
problems which, through lack of understanding, have eluded 
codification within our system of knowledge. 

Before approaching the controversial subject of the creation, it 
would be as well to be somewhat more specific about our terms 
of reference and those of other systems which seek to explain 
these mysteries. Broadly speaking, attempts to answer funda- 
mental questions dealing with the creation of the universe and 
the creation of life have, throughout recorded history, been of 
two kinds - the physical and the metaphysical. 

The metaphysical approaches have postulated a supreme, and 
usually divine, creator whose ends and means have been either 
revealed to, or otherwise perceived by, selected individuals in an 



224 Introducing Science 

extra-sensory manner (e.g., mystical experiences, dreams, etc.). 
Those who have not had the benefit of such direct experiences 
have either accepted or rejected the 'evidence' of those who have 
as a matter of personal preference - acceptance, of course, being 
an act of faith rather than of reason. The chief disadvantage of 
this method, from a practical point of view, is that divinely 
revealed information must be accepted as absolutely true, that is, 
true for all time despite any evidence that may crop up to conflict 
with it. This dilemma has given rise to theology, which may be 
described as the art of fitting new evidence into old explanations. 

Science, on the other hand, has no dogmatic beliefs of this 
kind, scientific knowledge, as we have seen, being self-correcting. 
Any fresh evidence that may appear either discredits or helps to 
confirm existing theories: if evidence builds up against a theory 
it is discarded and a better one sought in its place. 

It is not the purpose of this book either to present or to 
criticize the metaphysical views concerning the creation, and 
having now mentioned the differences between the two systems, 
we may proceed to an outline of the current views of scientists 
which have been deduced from the meagre evidence available. 

THE CREATION OF THE UNIVERSE 

In Chapter 1 we briefly surveyed the distribution of matter 
throughout the universe, locating the earth in the solar system 
and the solar system in our galaxy of stars; we also said that 
there are countless millions of other galaxies distributed through- 
out the universe. Our problem now is to examine any available 
evidence which might give a clue as to the origin of the universe. 
In Chapter 10 we mentioned one such clue - the shift towards 
the red of the light emitted by distant galaxies (see page 1 82). Now 
this evidence is extremely important as it seems to prove beyond 
doubt that all the distant galaxies are receding from us at 
enormous speeds. We must make it clear, however, that our 
galaxy, like most others, belongs to a local cluster of galaxies the 
components of which are not receding from each other - it is the 
distant clusters of galaxies which are receding from our local 
cluster. The rate at which these distant clusters are receding from 



The Creation 225 

ours - that is the rate at which the universe is expanding - has been 
measured spectroscopically with the somewhat startling result 
that the farther away a cluster of galaxies is, the greater is its 
observed speed of recession. In fact recently a very distant galaxy 
has been observed to be receding from us at nearly half the speed 
of light. Furthermore, from the evidence available, it now appears 
to be extremely likely that even more distant galaxies are receding 
from us at the speed of light itself, and therefore light from them 
can never reach us; such galaxies consequently cannot now form 
part of our real, that is observable, universe. 

At this point it is necessary to say something about interstellar 
distances; so far we have referred to distances in terms of the 
terrestrial measure of a mile, but this unit is quite unsuited to the 
measurement of cosmic distances as it is far too small. Instead 
the light year is commonly used, which is simply the distance 
travelled by light in one year. As light travels at 186,000 miles per 
second (see page 150), a light year is equal to about 6 million, 
million miles. Even this unit is hardly adequate as a measure of 
cosmic distances because the most distant galaxies are several 
thousand million light years away from us. Astronomers also use 
another unit, the parsec. A parsec is the distance away one 
Astronomical Unit (mean distance of the earth from the sun) 
would be to subtend one second of arc. One parsec equals 3*26 
light years. 

Returning now to the origin of the universe, we must consider 
the two conflicting theories that have been developed from the 
clue that it is expanding. The first theory, known as the Super- 
dense Theory, suggests that if the universe is expanding at a 
known rate, it must be possible by a simple calculation to arrive 
at a moment of time in which all the matter and energy of which 
it consists was concentrated in one 'superdense* agglomeration. 

A word of explanation is needed here: it must not be thought 
that the expansion of the universe implies that the earth is at its 
centre. Far from it - every cluster of galaxies is receding from 
every other cluster, without any one of them being at a centre. Ey 
way of analogy we may think of the atoms in an infinitely large crys- 
tal lattice as being the clusters of galaxies, so that if the crystal 
were to expand all the atoms would recede from each other. 

8 



226 Introducing Science 

According to the Superdense Theory, then, by working back- 
wards from the observed rates of recession of the galaxies, it is 
found that they should all have been packed close together some 
seven or eight thousand million years ago. At about this time, it is 
postulated, there was a 'big bang' as a result of which the super- 
dense agglomeration of matter and energy was scattered into 
multitudes of fragments, all travelling at different speeds, and in 
different directions, like fragments from an exploding bomb. The 
observed expansion of the universe is a continuation of this 
process which will presumably result ultimately in its dispersal, 
each component being for ever out of sight of its neighbours. 
Thus, as far as our cluster of galaxies is concerned, according to 
this theory, a time will come when we shall be alone in the 
observable universe. 

This then is the Superdense Theory, and we must now mention 
a recently devised method of testing it. Although very distant 
galaxies are too far away for us to see with our optical telescopes, 
we are able to locate some of them with radio telescopes which 
collect the radio waves emitted by certain stars within them. Now 
if we are locating a star, say, 5,000 million light years away from 
us by the electromagnetic radiation which it emits, we must 
remember that we are locating it not as it is now but as it was 
when the radiation was emitted - that is, we are locating its 
position in space 5,000 million years ago. This being the case, it 
follows, according to the Superdense Theory, that the more 
distant galaxies, that is the ones we are seeing nearer to the time 
of the 'big bang', should be closer to each other in space than 
those which are nearer to us. Preliminary results of radio- 
telescope surveys of distant parts of the cosmos indicate that this 
is in fact the case. Although this is regarded as strong support of 
the Superdense Theory, it should be borne in mind that we do 
not yet know enough about the source of the radio waves emitted 
by some stars (but not others) for the evidence to be conclusive. 

We now come to the second theory concerning the origin of the 
universe, whose adherents consider the Superdense Theory to be 
unsatisfactory in that it postulates a finite beginning, and possibly 
a finite end, for the universe. The second theory makes no such 
assumptions, as it proposes that matter is being continuously 



The Creation 227 

created throughout the universe. Thus matter which is lost by the 
recession of the distant galaxies is replaced by newly created 
matter, so that the observable universe is maintained in a steady 
state. This theory is accordingly known as the Steady State 
Theory. 

Those who have propounded this theory have been able to 
show that by modifying the General Theory of Relativity (see 
page 200) the observed expansion of the universe can be accounted 
for as a result of the creation of matter, in the form of hydrogen, 
as a property of space itself. On this basis it has been calculated 
that the observed rate of recession of the galaxies would need to 
be compensated by the creation of one atom of hydrogen in a 
volume of space about the size of a fairly large house every 
thousand years. Such a rate of creation could not, of course, be 
observed, and therefore in order to decide which of the two 
theories is the closest approximation to the truth we shall have 
to wait until we are able accurately to assess the density of matter 
throughout the universe. For, as we have seen, according to the 
Superdense Theory it would be denser the farther away in 
distance (i.e., the farther back in time) we go, while according to 
the Steady State Theory it should remain approximately constant. 

During the next few years we can expect to be able to answer 
this question one way or the other, which will give an enormous 
lead towards the solution of this most intriguing of all problems. 

THE CREATION OF THE EARTH AND THE PLANETS 

Having now given a resume of the current theories concerning 
the origin of the universe, we may turn to the less controversial 
subject of the creation of the earth and the planets. 

It used to be thought that the planets were lumps of matter 
which had been thrown out of the sun, but which had remained 
in its vicinity as a result of its gravitational attraction. However, 
with the invention of the spectroscope this theory ceased to be 
tenable as it was shown that the sun consists largely of hydrogen 
(over 90 per cent) and a small proportion of helium (about 8 per 
cent), while the earth, as we have seen, consists almost entirely of 
the heavier elements. In order, therefore, to understand the 



228 Introducing Science 

creation of the planets we must first examine the way in which the 
heavier elements (all the elements except hydrogen and helium) 
were created. 

We have said that the greatest part of the matter of the universe 
consists of hydrogen, the simplest of the elements, the stars in 
the sky being very largely condensed masses of hydrogen. We also 
know that in the central regions of the stars hydrogen is com- 
pressed to such an extent that enormous temperatures are 
attained - temperatures of the order of several millions of degrees. 
In Chapter 1 1 we saw that at such temperatures thermonuclear 
reactions occur spontaneously converting hydrogen into helium 
with the evolution of prolific quantities of energy: this energy is 
transmitted through the body of the star to its surface whence it 
is radiated away in the form of light and other electromagnetic 
radiations. 

Now although the temperature within the sun and other similar 
stars is sufficiently high to initiate the thermonuclear conversion 
of hydrogen into helium, it is not high enough for heavier elements 
to be formed, and consequently we have to look elsewhere for 
the source of these heavier elements. An important clue was pro- 
vided by the discovery that not all the matter of the universe is 
concentrated in the stars: matter has also been found to exist in 
the form of highly rarefied clouds of hydrogen gas floating 
between the stars within a galaxy, and even in between galaxies. 
In fact the stars in their passages through space often pass through 
such clouds, replenishing their supply of hydrogen as they do so. 

It has also been observed that, in addition to these clouds of 
pure hydrogen, there exist in space clouds in which the hydrogen 
is mixed with particles of dust. Indeed these dust-clouds are a 
great nuisance to astronomers as they obscure the stars which lie 
behind them. Nevertheless, they do provide a most significant 
clue to the origin of the heavier elements, for the presence of 
these solid particles floating through space indicates unequi- 
vocally the existence of non-gaseous heavy elements. It is now 
generally accepted that these heavier elements in the dust-clouds 
originated in certain exceptional stars called supernovae, which it 
will be necessary briefly to describe. 

Through the ages of recorded astronomy it has been observed 



The Creation 229 

that from time to time certain stars have suddenly and for no 
apparent reason flared up, increasing their brightness to such an 
extent that they become up to 100,000 times as bright as our 
sun. These stars are called novae, but they are comparatively 
unspectacular compared to the considerably rarer stellar ex- 
plosions suffered by the so-called supernovae, which can increase 
their brightness so that they emit some 1,000 million times as 
much energy as the sun. 

These supernovae have been observed in distant galaxies, but 
they are so rare that none has been observed in our own Milky 
Way since the invention of the telescope. There have, however, 
been two probable supernovae observed by the naked eye, one 
in 1604 and one in 1054. Of course, we cannot say for certain 
"what causes a supernova, but it is confidently believed, as a result 
of the available evidence, that this phenomenon occurs when a 
star runs out of hydrogen - this causes it to shrink and therefore 
to increase its internal pressure and temperature. As a conse- 
quence of this increased temperature the heavier elements are 
formed by the thermonuclear transformation of hydrogen and 
helium but, as we saw in Chapter 11, the formation of elements 
with atomic numbers in excess of about 40 involves the absorption 
of energy and therefore a fall in temperature. The interior of 
the star is thus rendered insufficiently hot to maintain the internal 
pressure required for its stability; consequently it collapses, and 
as it does so its rate of rotation increases to such an extent that 
material is flung from its surface. In this way the hot interior is 
exposed, which causes the observed increase in brightness. 
Finally, when the supernova has discharged most of its matter 
(in the form of the heavier elements) into space, it settles down 
as a small bright star of high density which is known as a white 
dwarf. 

This process could account for the presence in interstellar 
space of gas-clouds containing dust particles of the heavier 
elements. To account for the formation of the planets of our 
solar system, the most reasonable assumption to make is that the 
sun at one time had a companion star revolving around it which 
suffered the fate of becoming a supernova. Such double-star 
systems are extremely common, in fact it is estimated that half 



230 Introducing Science 

the stars in the universe are associated with one or more com- 
panion stars. It has been calculated that if such a supernova 
exploded at a distance from the sun approximately equal to the 
present distance of the planet Jupiter, only a very small fraction 
of the matter thrown out by the explosion would be required to 
be trapped by the sun's gravitational field in order to provide 
sufficient material for the creation of all the planets. 

Initially this material would have been at a very high tempera- 
ture, and would have spread out into a great flat disk of 
vaporized heavy elements in the plane of the present orbits of the 
planets. As the material in the disk cooled, however, the atoms 
would condense together forming small dust particles which, over 
the ages, as a result of constant collisions, would be expected to 
aggregate into larger and larger planetary bodies. It is considered 
unlikely that the present nine planets and the asteroids are the 
original agglomerations; they may rather be the present mani- 
festation of the break-up of larger and fewer planetary bodies. 
This breaking up of larger planetary bodies would account for 
the position of the three inner small planets (see page 15) of 
which the earth is one. As for the white dwarf which represented 
the residue of the exploding supernova, it must be assumed 
that as a result of the recoil of its explosion it broke free from 
the sun's gravitational field and flew off into space. 

This explanation of the creation of the planets may seem some- 
what hypothetical, which indeed it is, but like any other scientific 
theory, it fits all the observed facts as they now appear, and it 
will therefore survive unless any new evidence arises which will 
require its modification or replacement. 

THE CREATION OF LIFE 

We now come to consider the question of the creation of life on 
earth, a subject which we have already mentioned in Chapter 6 
when we encountered the difficulty of defining matter which is 
living. It will be remembered that we accepted then, as a basis for 
discussion, the cell as the unit of life, and described the virus as 
a likely step in the direction of the cell. However, it must not be 
overlooked that the virus, as we know it today, cannot itself be 



The Creation 231 

regarded as the forerunner of the cell, because it requires a host- 
cell in which to live. Nevertheless, a single sub-cellular type of 
large molecule of the virus type seems a most probable stage in 
the development of the cell. 

The problem, then, is to try to visualize the sort of processes 
which, taking place on the newly formed earth consisting pre- 
sumably of only simple inorganic molecules, led to the formation 
of the intensely complex proteins and polynucleotides which are 
the raw materials of life as we know it today. 

As a first step, there is a certain amount of evidence that such 
simple molecules as water, methane, and ammonia can be built 
up into amino acids (see page 101) by the action of the sun's 
ultra-violet radiation; furthermore, it is considered likely that 
these simple molecules were present in substantial quantities in 
the atmosphere of the young earth. 

In Chapter 6 we said that in living organisms the combination 
of amino acids to form proteins requires the catalytic effect of 
enzymes (which are themselves proteins), but there is no reason 
to suppose that this is the only way - the fact that it is un- 
doubtedly the best and quickest way does not preclude a slower 
and more inefficient means from having initiated the process. It 
has been suggested that such catalytic surfaces as air/water inter- 
faces or wet clay may well have been suitable for the purpose. 

Once molecules as complex as proteins had been formed on the 
earth, the stage would be set for the formation of nucleo-proteins 
capable of self-duplication. Such molecules would then be able 
to multiply until their environment ceased to contain the appro- 
priate ready-made components - self-duplication would then 
cease until by some accident (e.g., mutation) some molecules 
acquired the ability of catalysing the production of the essential 
missing component from its constituents. Molecules possessing 
this ability would thrive and evolution by natural selection would 
have begun. 

Eventually some of these self-duplicating virus-like molecules 
may be imagined as forming symbiotic relationships with each 
other, so that orderly systems of separate molecules would group 
together, dividing between them the labour of manufacturing the 
materials required for their duplication. Such systems of 



232 Introducing Science 

molecules may then be imagined as existingin a medium consist ing 
of the materials resulting from their metabolic processes. It is in 
some such way as this that the evolution of cells is envisaged - the 
self-duplicating molecules developing into the nucleus, and their 
metabolic environment becoming the cytoplasm. Such theories 
are necessarily of a speculative nature and many variants and 
amplifications of the above outline have been suggested. 

However, there is no evidence to support the view that anima- 
tion only occurred at one time and place, making us all descended 
from one molecule that acquired the ability to live. If we allow 
that life may have been created not once but many times, and in 
many places, we are led to the question of whether or not new 
life is still being created from the inanimate. This is a matter over 
which there is a good deal of controversy, although there is no 
evidence either for or against the proposition. This is not 
surprising as any newly formed primitive organism, at the present 
stage of evolution, would almost certainly be consumed by, or 
at least unable to compete with, more highly developed and well- 
established organisms. It must not be forgotten that when life 
first appeared on earth it was a very different planet from that 
with which we are now familiar: the two principal destructive 
forces of nature, oxidation and bacterial decay, were totally 
absent. The earth's atmosphere largely became oxidizing as a 
result of the oxygen liberated by plants during photosynthesis, 
and bacterial decay had to await the arrival of bacteria. Thus the 
first life-forms would have been born into a considerably less 
destructive and competitive environment than any newly created 
life could expect to find today. 

Before leaving this subject, it should be mentioned that a theory 
has recently been proposed which postulates that life may not 
have originated on the condensed earth, but may have been 
created at an earlier stage in the history of the planets. Indeed, 
it is quite possible that suitable conditions for the building up of 
large organic molecules could have occurred when the heavy 
elements were still in the form of dust particles, or small 
agglomerations, circling the sun. The recent discovery of traces 
of organic compounds on a meteorite has given some support to 
this theory, but as the meteorite fell to earth during the last 



The Creation 233 

century, the possibility of contamination on earth cannot be ruled 
out. 

This theory leads inevitably to the question of whether life 
exists elsewhere hi the universe, either within the solar system or 
outside it. Here the evidence is very sparse indeed: it can be said 
that climatic conditions on our neighbouring planets, Venus and 
Mars, are such that life is just conceivable; in fact the spectro- 
scope indicates the presence on Mars of organic compounds - not 
necessarily, of course, animate. However, speculation on this 
subject is somewhat pointless, especially as it should not be too 
long before space vehicles capable of sending back the relevant 
information have been landed on Mars. 

As regards life outside the solar system, we have no evidence 
at all - no evidence even of the existence of planetary systems. All 
we can say is that, taking into account the gigantic number of 
stars in the universe, it would be most surprising if our sun were 
the only one to be favoured with a system of planets. Further- 
more, if there are as many planetary systems as one would 
expect, it is extremely probable that a great many of them have 
individual planets, with similar temperatures and climatic con- 
ditions to ours, on which life could have developed. It must be 
remembered that the whole universe, so far as we know, is con- 
structed from the ninety-two elements with which we are familiar 
on earth, and their chemistry will be the same wherever they are. 

In concluding this chapter it is perhaps appropriate to say once 
more that science is continually moving forward. Even twenty 
years ago it would have been almost inconceivable to imagine 
that space vehicles could tell us whether or not life exists on Mars 
within our lifetime. In the same way, new evidence may come in 
the future from totally unexpected quarters to help us solve what 
now appear to be unanswerable questions concerning the creation. 



CHAPTER 13 

THE NATURE OF MATTER 



HAVING discussed some of the problems to which we are not 
able to give a definitive answer through lack of evidence, we now 
pass on to look at some of those subjects at the boundary of our 
knowledge which we are unable to answer through lack of under- 
standing. 

The first of these may be simply put : what is matter ? Although 
we have devoted over half this book to describing the properties 
of matter, our only attempt at a definition has been to say that 
matter is a specialized form of energy which possesses the 
attributes of mass and extension in space. However, the view has 
recently been expressed that perhaps this is not enough - that 
matter is more than simply another name for energy.* 

That the mass of an atom at rest is a form of energy has been 
proved by nuclear transformations and the liberation of energy 
equal to the mass defect, but the view that matter may be some- 
thing more than energy is to some extent supported by the 
observation that elementary particles can be divided into two 
separate classes : fermions and bosons. Fermions are further sub- 
divided into two groups, nucleons and hyperons belonging to one 
group called baryons, electrons, positrons, and neutrinos belong- 
ing to the other group called leptons. These two groups, baryons 
and leptons, are distinguished from each other in that members 
from one group cannot transform into members of the other 
group. Furthermore, all fermions are characterized by the fact 
that their numbers are conserved throughout all nuclear inter- 
actions. The number of bosons, on the other hand, which include 
photons and some mesons, is not conserved. 

This diversity in the fundamental properties of elementary 

particles seems to imply that matter, which is of course made up 

of both fermions and bosons, cannot be simply regarded as 

consisting of the energy of the particles concerned. However, at 

*Sir G. P. Thomson, The British Association, September 1960. 



The Nature of Matter 235 

this point we are at the limit of our understanding; indeed, as we 
have already said, a coherent system has not yet been formulated 
which satisfactorily explains the abundant evidence concerned 
with the sub-nuclear particles and their interactions. 

A further difficulty concerning our understanding of the 
structure of matter arises from doubts as to the 'elementarity' of 
some of these particles. Recent scattering experiments with very 
high-energy electrons have indicated that protons themselves 
seem to have a structure, consisting of a central core surrounded 
by a cloud of pi-mesons. Thus, as Professor A. Salam has said, 
6 All particles are elementary, but some are more elementary than 
others/* 

Perhaps some of the difficulty which we experience in failing to 
understand the fundamental properties of the constituents of 
matter is attributable to the inadequacy of language. Inevitably, 
our words and the meaning we ascribe to them are a reflection of 
our everyday experiences; we must therefore expect them to be 
ill-adapted to the description of entities which, both by virtue of 
their size and nature, do not fall within the scope of these experi- 
ences. Thus, to describe, say, an electron as either a 'wave* or a 
'particle*, is as we have already said no more than an analogy. 
It is clearly neither the one nor the other; it is something for 
which we have no word. For this reason the question 'What is an 
electron?* becomes somewhat rhetorical. We shall return to this 
question of meaning and the questions it is sensible to ask shortly ; 
before doing so we must say something about * anti-particles * and 
their logical consequence - anti-matter. 

ANTI-MATTER 

We have already described the first anti-particle to be discovered, 
the positron (see page 191); it will be remembered that this entity 
has an identical mass to an electron, but an opposite charge. In 
1955 the Bevatron 'atom smasher* (at Berkeley, U.S.A.) produced 
a new particle whose existence had been predicted some years 
earlier. This particle has the same mass as a proton, but being 
negatively charged is called an anti-proton. More recently still 
**Penguin Science Survey , 1961, vol. I. 



236 Introducing Science 

anti-neutrons and anti-neutrinos have been observed, so that 
there is no theoretical reason why anti-matter should not be built 
up from these anti-particles. 

This remains, however, something of an academic proposition 
on our earth - even if we were able to join an anti-proton with a 
positron to make an atom of anti-hydrogen, it would be difficult 
to know what to do with it, because a particle and its anti- 
particle annihilate each other on collision with the production of 
energy. As everything on earth is constructed of matter, anti- 
matter would stand considerably less chance of survival than the 
proverbial snowball in hell. Nevertheless, as anti-matter probably 
has an identical structure to that of matter, there is no logical 
reason for supposing that parts of the universe (distant galaxies, 
for instance) could not be made of it. This is, however, a matter 
for speculation* 

Finally on this subject we may note that, according to the 
Special Theory of Relativity, a negative electron has a positive 
kinetic energy, which causes it to move through the four- 
dimensional space-time continuum from past to future. On the 
other hand a positive electron has a negative kinetic energy which 
would appear to mean that it travels backwards through time 
from future to past. Whether such a state of affairs has any real 
meaning, or whether it is no more than a mathematical mis- 
understanding, we cannot yet say. It is, however, an interesting 
point, which leads us back to the question of "meaning' and the 
sort of questions which it is sensible to ask. 

CAUSALITY AND PROBABILITY 

We have said that there are some questions which the failure of 
language make it difficult for us to answer; as we shall now see, 
there are also some questions which it is meaningless to ask. For 
example, in Chapter 1 1 we mentioned the Heisenberg Uncertainty 
Principle, according to which we are precluded from knowing 
both the position and velocity of the ultimate particles of nature 
(i.e., particles small enough to be governed by quantum con- 
siderations). Therefore, if we know, say, the velocity of an 
electron, it is meaningless to ask, 'Where precisely will it be at a 



The Nature of Matter 237 

given instant of time ? ' Admittedly the question sounds reasonable 
enough at the common-sense level, but as it demands a piece of 
information which our relationship with the universe precludes 
us from possessing it is without meaning. 

It must be accepted, then, that some apparently sensible 
questions lose their meaning at the profoundest level, and we must 
admit that we cannot expect to know everything about the uni- 
verse with unlimited precision. This brings us to the question of 
causality. According to the Laws of Classical Physics (physics 
before the invention of the Quantum Theory), every 'effect' in 
nature was held to be the result of a definite 'cause': every 
occurrence was regarded as being predictable if the conditions 
preceding it could be precisely described. This is the Law of 
Causality. 

Let us look at an example: we say that roulette is a game of 
4 chance', by which we mean that we cannot predict into which of 
thirty-seven holes the revolving ball will fall. But we must be 
clear that in this case we are using the word c chance* to conceal 
our inability to calculate the various factors which control the 
course of the ball. If we could measure with precision the initial 
momentum of the ball and the wheel, and if we had an accurate 
knowledge of the friction forces between them, we would be able 
to predict with certainty where the ball would come to rest. 
Clearly, however, to do so is not a practicable proposition and 
to all intents and purposes the final position of the ball depends on 
chance. But because the outcome could in theory be predicted 
the Law of Causality is not broken. 

It is only when we try to apply these strict causal rules to the 
behaviour of sub-atomic particles that we find that they break 
down. The reason for this is easy to see: we never know precisely 
where these particles are. All we can do, as we have already said, 
is to express their positions as a probability that they will be 
found in a particular area of particular wave-trains. Clearly, 
once we have admitted that we cannot be sure where a particle 
is, we must automatically relinquish our claim to knowing what 
will become of it in the future. To be precise, we must even admit 
that consecutive observations of what we may imagine to be the 
same electron may in fact be observations of two separate 



238 Introducing Science 

electrons. For if a particular particle cannot be precisely located 
it is not reasonable to be able to claim to have established its 
identity. 

Thus the whole basis of causal relationships and the certainties 
they imply is completely undermined and must be replaced by the 
conception of probabilities which is inherent in the Quantum and 
Wave Theories. For example, as we mentioned in Chapter 2, 
natural radioactive decay is a non-causal, or indeterminate, 
occurrence - there is no way of knowing when a radioactive atom 
will break down because it is purely a matter of chance. We may 
express the chance as a probability, and over a large enough 
number of atoms this probability becomes a near certainty, but 
it is still fundamentally a probability. 

In conclusion it must be added that some physicists, including 
the late Professor Einstein, have not accepted as final these in- 
determinate interpretations of nature. Indeed, it is by no means 
impossible that a unified theory will one day be discovered to 
include both relativity and quantum phenomena, which will 
revert to the causality of classical physics by showing that the 
probabilities of quantum mechanics simply conceal our ignorance 
of the truly causal nature of reality. This is a horizon for scientists 
of the future. 



EPILOGUE 



AT the beginning of this book it was said that our approach to 
the subject of science was to be exclusively descriptive; that is, 
we have not attempted to illustrate the crucial part played by 
experiment, measurement, and mathematics - the three essential 
steps in a quantitative assessment of natural phenomena. 

The descriptive approach has been adhered to throughout, 
because this book is not intended for the professional scientist 
whose job it is to carry out these experiments and measurements, 
but rather for the layman who wishes to understand the ideas 
deduced from them. However, it should be appreciated that the 
exclusion of both the quantitative and the historical approach has 
made it impossible to illustrate the extent to which the develop- 
ment of scientific knowledge and understanding has depended 
upon man's ability to make measurements of ever-increasing 
precision. In fact, nearly all the great theories of science (e.g., the 
Relativity and Quantum Theories) have been developed as a 
result of small discrepancies between experimentally measured 
values and the mathematical predictions of existing theories. It is 
therefore appropriate that this aspect should be mentioned lest 
its importance should be overlooked. 

Another defect of the purely qualitative approach is that some- 
times the language of words is unable to communicate concepts 
that have their origin in the language of mathematics - in such 
cases, therefore (e.g., wave mechanics and General Relativity), we 
have been rendered almost totally inarticulate. 

Nevertheless, it is hoped that the reader will have found that 
the benefits of the descriptive approach have outweighed its 
defects. 